39446,
AgnusDei,
Agnus Dei is the Latin name under which the "Lamb of God" is honoured within Christian liturgies descending from the historic Latin liturgical tradition, including those of Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism and Anglicanism. It is the name given to a specific prayer that occurs in these liturgies, and is the name given to the music pieces that accompany the text of this prayer.[1][2]
The use of the title "Lamb of God" in liturgy is based on John 1:29, in which St. John the Baptist, upon seeing Jesus, proclaims "Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!"
The Syrian custom of a chant addressed to the Lamb of God was introduced into the Roman Rite Mass by Pope Sergius I (687–701)[3][4] in the context of his rejection of the Council of Trullo of 692 (which was well received in the Byzantine East), whose canons had forbidden the iconographic depiction of Christ as a lamb instead of a man.[5]
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis.
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis.
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, dona nobis pacem.
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, grant us peace.
The verse used in the first and second invocations may be repeated as many times as necessary whilst the celebrant prepares the host and wine for communion.[7]
In a Tridentine Requiem Mass, the words "miserere nobis" are replaced by "dona eis requiem" (grant them rest), while "dona nobis pacem" is replaced by "dona eis requiem sempiternam" (grant them eternal rest).
The priest uses the phrase "Lamb of God" again, later in the Mass. While displaying the Eucharistic species to the people before giving them Holy Communion, he says: "Ecce Agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. Beati qui ad cenam Agni vocati sunt." ("Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who takes away the sins of the world. Blessed are those called to the supper of the Lamb.")[6]: 132 
The following instances are found in the Church of England's Book of Common Prayer:
From "The Litany":
O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Grant us thy peace.
O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Have mercy upon us.
From "Holy Communion":
Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
The following versions are found in Common Worship, the alternative Anglican liturgical resources, and also in the Episcopal Church's liturgical resources:
Lamb of God, you take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us.
Lamb of God, you take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us.
Lamb of God, you take away the sin of the world, grant us peace.
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, grant us thy peace.
Jesus, Lamb of God, have mercy on us.
Jesus, bearer of our sins, have mercy on us.
Jesus, redeemer of the world, grant us peace.
The version found in the Lutheran Service Book of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod is:
Lamb of God, You take away the sin of the world; have mercy on us. 
Lamb of God, You take away the sin of the world; have mercy on us. 
Lamb of God, You take away the sin of the world; grant us Your peace, grant us Your peace.
A popular worship song among Evangelical Protestants tradition is a rendition of the traditional Angus Dei by Michael W. Smith.  Based on a paraphrase of Revelation 5, the words are 
Alleluia Alleluia
For our Lord God Almighty reigns
Alleluia Alleluia
For our Lord God Almighty reigns
Alleluia Holy
Holy
Are You Lord God Almighty
Worthy is the Lamb
Worthy is the Lamb
You are Holy
(Last stanza repeats 3 times)
A Ukrainian translation was sung in 2015 in Lviv, Ukraine, during the War in the Donbass[8] at an event organized by Franklin Graham.  The song was notably sung again on Easter 2022 in Lviv by a choir of Ukrainian refugees fleeing the Russo-Ukrainian War.[9]
Virtually every Mass setting (of which there are thousands) includes an Agnus Dei. Here are some examples:
With a slightly changed text, the Agnus Dei is also part of musical settings composed for the Requiem Mass for the Dead. Such settings include:
Some composers set the text as an independent movement, such as Samuel Barber, who wrote a version combining the text with the music of his Adagio for Strings, sung a cappella.
Outside of religious use, the text has been used by composers such as:
