22337,
Beadweaving,
Bead weaving (or beadweaving) is a set of techniques for weaving sheets and objects of seed beads. Threads are strung through and/or around the beads to hold them together. It can be done either on a loom or using one of a number of off-loom stitches.
When weaving on a loom, the beads are strung on the weft threads and locked in between the warp threads. Although loomed pieces are typically rectangular, it is possible to increase and decrease to produce angular or curvy shapes.  Fringe can also be added during weaving or before the piece is removed from the loom.
The most common[citation needed] modern loom bead weaving technique requires two passes of the weft thread per row of beads.  First, an entire row of beads is strung on the weft thread.  Then the beads are pressed in between the warp threads from below. Then the needle is passed back through the beads, but above the warp threads, to lock the beads into place. 
Bead looms vary in size and are typically made of wood or metal.  Usually, a comb or spring is used to hold the warp threads a bead-width apart (the lede image shows a threaded rod).  Some looms have roller bars; these allow the weaver to produce pieces that are longer than the loom.  Most looms are meant to sit on a table, but some have floor stands or are meant to sit in the lap. Cheap bead looms are sometimes made from styrofoam trays, wrapping the warp through evenly-spaced small slits notched into opposite edges.
Heddle bead looms were popular in the United States near the beginning of the 20th century. They allow weaving of beads by raising every other thread and inserting strung beads in the shed, the space between the lowered and raised threads. There are still a few heddle bead looms being manufactured today. The most difficult part of loomwork is finishing off the warp threads.
Off-loom beadweaving is a family of beadwork techniques in which seed beads are woven together into a flat fabric, a tubular rope, or a three-dimensional object such as a ball, clasp, box, or a piece of jewelry. Most off-loom techniques can be accomplished using a single needle and thread (no warp threads), and some have two-needle variations.
Different stitches produce pieces with distinct textures, shapes, and patterns.  There are many different off-loom bead stitches, including new stitches (distinct thread paths) published as recently as 2015:
Spiral Bead Weaving Stitches
