22156,
BINorwegianBusinessSchool,
BI Norwegian Business School (Bokmål: Handelshøyskolen BI) is a private university college in Norway. It was founded as a private, commercial and non-accredited night school in 1943, offering shorter courses in business and office-related subjects for tradespeople. In 1969 it became a foundation and it was later accredited as a college and later as a specialised university-level institution, becoming Norway's second business school after the state Norwegian School of Economics.
BI has four[1] campuses with the main one located in Oslo. The college has 845 employees consisting of an academic staff of 404 people and 441 administrative staff.[2] In 2015, it had 18,728 students.[1] BI Norwegian Business School is a private foundation and is accredited as a specialised university institution.[1] It is one of three private specialized universities in Norway, alongside VID and MF.
BI Norwegian Business School was founded in 1943 by Finn Øien as Bedriftøkonomisk Institutt (English: Institute of Managerial Economics), hence the abbreviation BI.
BI offers a full set of programmes for bachelor, master and doctoral degrees, as well as executive education and tailor-made programmes for businesses. The teaching languages are English (BBA and graduate programmes) and Norwegian (most undergraduate programmes and custom programmes for local businesses). The school currently participates in exchange programmes with 200 foreign institutions in 45 countries.[1]
The internationally award-winning main campus in Nydalen (Oslo)[3] was designed by Niels Torp,[4] who also designed Gardermoen Airport.
Norsk Kundebarometer (NKB) (English: Norwegian customer barometer) is a research programme run by BI, with a focus on relations between customers and businesses. Based on an annual survey of Norwegian households, it collects data that may be used for comparison between businesses, comparisons between various industries and comparisons over time.[5]
BI has educated roughly 1700 students in China[10] through its close relationship with Fudan University in Shanghai and is also the majority shareholder of the ISM University of Management and Economics (previously known as International School of Management) with around 1800 students located in Vilnius and Kaunas in Lithuania.[11]
Undergraduate (All taught in Norwegian except Business Administration and Data Science for Business)[12]
Graduate (All taught in English, except MSc in Accounting & Auditing and MSc in Law & Business)
Executive MBA (EMBA general management in cooperation with Nanyang Business School (Nanyang Technological University), Singapore, IE Business School in Madrid, Spain and Haas School of Business (University of California, Berkeley), Berkeley, California, U.S.)
The school has two student organisations, one for the main campus in Oslo and one for the other campuses. The Oslo student organisation is called "Studentforeningen ved Handelshøyskolen BI i Oslo [no]" (SBIO) (English: The Student Association at BI in Oslo). This union was formed in 2005 after the relocation of the three locations in Oslo into one—Nydalen Campus. The three previous unions were Bedriftøkonomisk Studentersamfund (BS), BISON and MØSS. BS was the oldest union, formed in 1964. The union for the other campuses is "BI Studentsamfunn" (BIS) (English: BI Student Community). This union was founded on 7 February 1987 and is today the largest student union of a private school in Norway.[15] As of June 2019, the two student organisations have decided to merge into one student body, the name and other details of which will be decided over the summer of 2019.
The student newspaper is named INSIDE and its circulation is 11,000.
The all-male student choir is named UFDA The Choir Boys[16] and was established in 1986.[16]
The Financial Times ranks BI as Norway's best business school for the 6th year running in its European Business School Ranking 2021. BI ranks number 50 out of the 95 schools that make it onto the list.[17]
Financial Times also ranks BI Norwegian Business School's Master of Science in Business as one of the world's 100 best programmes in its latest FT Master in Management 2021 ranking.[18]
BI is accredited as a specialised university institution by the Norwegian Agency for Quality Assurance in Education (NOKUT).[19]
BI has also received the following recognitions from private institutions:
Triple crown
BI Norwegian Business School is the first Norwegian business school that has received the three most prestigious international accreditations. Less than 1 % of business schools worldwide have achieved triple accreditation.[24]
Information box
{'Motto': 'Make it your business', 'Type': 'Private University College', 'Established': '1943', 'Accreditation': 'Accredited as a specialised university institution (vitenskapelig høgskole)', 'President': 'Karen Spens', 'Academic staff': '404', 'Administrative staff': '441', 'Students': '21,653', 'Undergraduates': 'c.\u200915,000', 'Postgraduates': 'c. 4,000', 'Doctoral students': 'c. 100', 'Location': 'Oslo, Norway\n59°56′55.37″N 10°46′5.21″E', 'Campus': 'Oslo, Stavanger, Bergen, Trondheim', 'Colours': '  BI blue', 'Website': 'www.bi.edu'}
