8350,
DellaRovere,
The House of Della Rovere (pronounced [della ˈroːvere]; literally "of the oak tree") was a noble family of Italy. It had humble origins in Savona, in Liguria, and acquired power and influence through nepotism and ambitious marriages arranged by two Della Rovere popes: Francesco Della Rovere, who ruled as Sixtus IV from 1471 to 1484) and his nephew Giuliano, who became Julius II in 1503.[1] Sixtus IV built the Sistine Chapel, which is named for him. Julius II was patron to Michelangelo, Raphael and many other Renaissance artists and started the modern rebuilt of St. Peter's Basilica. Also the Basilica of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome was the family church of the Della Rovere.[citation needed] Members of the family were influential in the Church of Rome, and as dukes of Urbino, dukes of Sora and lords of Senigallia; the title of Urbino was extinguished with the death of Francesco Maria II in 1631, and the family died out with the death of his granddaughter Vittoria, Grand Duchess of Tuscany.[1]
Francesco Della Rovere was born into a poor family in Liguria in north-west Italy in 1414, the son of Leonardo della Rovere of Savona.[1] A Franciscan who became Minister General of his order, then cardinal, he had a reptation for unworldliness until he was elected pope in 1471. As Sixtus IV he was both wealthy and powerful, and at once set about giving power and wealth to his nephews of the Della Rovere and Riario families. Within months of his election, he had made Giuliano della Rovere (the future pope Julius II) and Pietro Riario both cardinals and bishops; four other nephews were also made cardinals.[2]: 252 [3]: 128  He made Giovanni Della Rovere, who was not a priest, prefect of Rome, and arranged for him to marry into the da Montefeltro family, dukes of Urbino. Sixtus claimed descent from a noble Della Rovere family, the counts of Vinovo in Piemonte, and adopted their coat-of-arms.[4]
Guidobaldo da Montefeltro adopted Francesco Maria I della Rovere, his sister's child and nephew of Pope Julius II. Guidobaldo I, who was heirless, called Francesco Maria at his court, and named him as heir of the Duchy of Urbino in 1504, this through the intercession of Julius II. In 1508, Francesco Maria inherited the duchy thereby starting the line of Rovere Dukes of Urbino. That dynasty ended in 1626 when Pope Urban VIII incorporated Urbino into the papal dominions. As compensation to the last sovereign duke, the title only could be continued by Francesco Maria II, and after his death by his heir, Federico Ubaldo.
Vittoria, last descendant of the della Rovere family (she was the only child of Federico Ubaldo), married Ferdinando II de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany. They had two children: Cosimo III, Tuscany's longest reigning monarch, and Francesco Maria de' Medici, a prince of the Church.
Among the many people who did not belong to this family, but bore the same name, are:
and various artists, including:
Francesco della Rovere, later Sixtus IV
Giuliano della Rovere, later Julius II
Francesco Maria I della Rovere
Guidobaldo II della Rovere
Francesco Maria II della Rovere
Vittoria della Rovere
Palazzo Ducale, Urbino
Rocca Della Rovere in Senigallia
Rocca Roveresca in Mondavio
Palazzo Della Rovere in San Lorenzo in Campo
Palazzo Della Rovere in Rome
Information box
{'Country': 'Duchy of Urbino\nPapal States', 'Place of origin': 'Savona, Republic of Genoa', 'Founded': '14th century', 'Founder': 'Leonardo Beltramo della Rovere', 'Final head': 'Vittoria della Rovere, died 1694', 'Titles': 'Pope (not hereditary)\nDuke of Urbino\nDuke of Sora\nLord of Pesaro\nLord of Senigallia\nLord of Vinovo\nCount of Vinovo', 'Motto': 'Audentes Fortuna iuvat', 'Estate(s)': 'Palazzo Ducale, Urbino\nPalazzo Della Rovere, Rome'}
