10460,
EmperorAnkō,
Emperor Ankō (安康天皇, Ankō-tennō) (401 — 24 September 456) was the 20th legendary Emperor of Japan,[2] according to the traditional order of succession.[3] Emperor Ankō is the earliest generally agreed upon historical ruler of all or a part of Japan.[4]
No firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 28 February 454 to 24 September 456.[5]
Ankō was a 5th-century monarch and the first generally agreed upon historical ruler of Japan.[4] The reign of Emperor Kinmei (c. 509 – 571 AD), the 29th  Emperor,[6] is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates;[7] however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737–806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.[8]
According to Kojiki and Nihon Shoki, Ankō was the second son of Emperor Ingyō, his birth name was Anaho (穴穂皇子). After his father’s death, Anaho battled with Prince Kinashi no Karu. Anaho was the new ruler after his father's passing and declared that Princess Karu no Ōiratsume be hung for her actions and Kinashi no Karu be exiled. The crown prince was unhappy with this and attempted to prevent the hanging from taking place. He rallied a few of his most loyal followers who also did not agree with the princess's death to help save her. He successfully saved her and slaughtered the small garrison of men attending her hanging. But unfortunately, Anaho grabbed the princess and pressed his blade to her throat. Kinashi no Karu offered himself instead. Kinashi no Karu let Anaho defeat him in exchange for the life of Princess Karu no Ōiratsume. He then became Emperor Ankō.
Ankō's contemporary title would not have been tennō, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reign of Emperor Tenmu. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu Ōkimi (治天下大王), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven". Alternatively, Ankō might have been referred to as ヤマト大王/大君 or the "Great King of Yamato".
Ankō was assassinated in his third year of reign by Mayowa no Ōkimi (Prince Mayowa), in retaliation for the execution of Mayowa's father.[9]
The actual site of Ankō's grave is not known.[2] The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine at Nara Prefecture.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ankō's mausoleum. It is formally named Sugawara no Fushimi no nishi misasagi.[10]
His Empress was Princess Nakashi (中磯皇女), Emperor Richu’s daughter. He did not have other consorts and any children.
Empress (Kōgō) : Princess Nakashi (中磯皇女), Emperor Richu's daughter
Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Ankō
Unless otherwise noted (as BC), years are in CE / AD  * Imperial Consort and Regent Empress Jingū is not traditionally listed.



Information box
{'Reign': '28 February 454 – 24 September 456 (traditional)[1]', 'Predecessor': 'Ingyō', 'Successor': 'Yūryaku', 'Born': 'Anaho (穴穂)\n401\nJapan', 'Died': '24 September 456 (aged 54–55)\nJapan', 'Burial': 'Sugawara no Fushimi no nishi misasagi (菅原伏見西陵) (Nara)', 'Spouse': 'Nakashi', 'House': 'Imperial House of Japan', 'Father': 'Emperor Ingyō', 'Mother': 'Oshisaka no Ōnakatsuhime'}