10417,
EmperorYōmei,
Emperor Yōmei (用明天皇, Yōmei-tennō, 540 – 21 May 587) was the 31st Emperor of Japan,[1] according to the traditional order of succession.[2]
Yōmei's reign spanned the years from 585 until his death in 587.[3]
He was called Tachibana no Toyohi no Mikoto (橘豊日尊) in the Kojiki. He was also referred to as Prince Ōe (大兄皇子, Ōe no Miko) and Prince Ikebe (池辺皇子, Ikebe no Miko) after the palace in which he lived. He acceded to the throne after the death of his half brother, Emperor Bidatsu.
The influential courtiers from Emperor Bidatsu's reign, Mononobe no Moriya, also known as Mononobe Yuge no  Moriya no Muraji or as Ō-muraji Yuge no Moriya, and Soga no Umako no Sukune, both remained in their positions during the reign of Emperor Yōmei. Umako was the son of Soga Iname no Sukune, and therefore, he would have been one of Emperor Yōmei's cousins.
Yōmei's contemporary title would not have been tennō, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jitō. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu Ōkimi (治天下大王), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven". Alternatively, Yōmei might have been referred to as ヤマト大王/大君 or the "Great King of Yamato".
Emperor Yōmei's reign lasted only two years; and he died at the age of 46 or 47.
Because of the brevity of his reign, Emperor Yōmei was not responsible for any radical changes in policy, but his support of Buddhism created tension with supporters of Shinto who opposed its introduction. According to Nihon Shoki, Emperor Yomei believed both in Buddhism and Shinto. Moriya, the most influential supporter of Shinto, conspired with Emperor Yōmei's brother, Prince Anahobe, and after Emperor Yomei's death they made an abortive attempt to seize the throne. Although Emperor Yōmei is reported to have died from illness, this incident and the brevity of his reign have led some to speculate that he was actually assassinated by Moriya and Prince Anahobe.
The actual site of Yōmei's grave is known.[1] The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Yōmei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kōchi no Shinaga no hara no misasagi.[7]
Emperor Yōmei was the fourth son of Emperor Kinmei and his mother was Empress Hirohime, a daughter of Soga no Iname.[8]
In 586, Emperor Yōmei took his half-sister Princess Anahobe no Hashihito (穴穂部間人皇女, Anahobe no Hashihito no Himemiko), whose mother was another of Iname's daughters, Soga no Oane Hime, as his consort. Princess Hashihito no Anahobe bore him four sons.
Empress (Kōgō): Princess Hashihito no Anahobe (穴穂部間人皇女, d.622), Emperor Kinmei's daughter
Concubine (Hin): Soga no Ishikina (蘇我石寸名), Soga no Iname's daughter
Consort (Hi): Katsuragi Hiroko (葛城広子), Katsuragi no Atahe's daughter
Yomei had three Empresses and seven Imperial sons and daughters.[5]
[9]
Unless otherwise noted (as BC), years are in CE / AD  * Imperial Consort and Regent Empress Jingū is not traditionally listed.



Information box
{'Reign': '3 October 585 – 21 May 587', 'Predecessor': 'Bidatsu', 'Successor': 'Sushun', 'Born': '12 October 540', 'Died': '21 May 587 (aged 46)', 'Burial': 'Kōchi no Shinaga no hara no misasagi (河内磯長原陵) (Osaka)', 'Spouse': 'Anahobe no Hashihito', 'Issue\namong others...': 'Prince Shōtoku', 'House': 'Imperial House of Japan', 'Father': 'Emperor Kinmei', 'Mother': 'Soga no Kitashihime', 'Religion': 'Shinto'}