9603,
ErnestRutherford,

Ernest Rutherford, 1st Baron Rutherford of Nelson, OM, PRS, HonFRSE[4] (30 August 1871 – 19 October 1937) was a Nobel Prize winning New Zealand physicist who was a pioneering researcher in both atomic and nuclear physics. Rutherford has been described as "the father of nuclear physics",[5] the greatest experimentalist "since Michael Faraday,"[6] and "one of the greatest scientists of all time."[7] In 1908, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry "for his investigations into the disintegration of the elements, and the chemistry of radioactive substances." He was the first Oceanian Nobel laureate, and the first to perform the awarded work in Canada.
Rutherford's discoveries include the concept of radioactive half-life, the radioactive element radon, and the differentiation and naming of alpha and beta radiation. Together with Thomas Royds, Rutherford is credited with proving that alpha radiation is helium nuclei.[8][9] In 1911, he theorized that atoms have their charge concentrated in a very small nucleus,[10] and thereby pioneered the Rutherford model of the atom, through his discovery and interpretation of Rutherford scattering by the gold foil experiment of Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden. He performed the first artificially induced nuclear reaction in 1917 in experiments where nitrogen nuclei were bombarded with alpha particles. As a result, he discovered the emission of a subatomic particle which he initially called the "hydrogen atom," but later (more accurately) named the proton.[11][12] Later, Rutherford capped off his exploration of the nucleus with the discovery of the neutron. He is also credited with developing the atomic numbering system alongside Henry Moseley. His lesser achievements include temporary advancements in radio communications and ultrasound technology.
Rutherford became Director of the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge in 1919. Under his leadership, the neutron was discovered by James Chadwick in 1932. In the same year, the first experiment to split the nucleus in a fully controlled manner was performed by students working under his direction, John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton.
In honor of his scientific advancements, Rutherford was recognized as a Baron in the peerages of both New Zealand and Britain. After his death in 1937, he was buried in Westminster Abbey near Charles Darwin and Isaac Newton. The chemical element rutherfordium (104Rf) was named after him in 1997.
Ernest Rutherford was born in Brightwater, a town near Nelson, New Zealand, to James Rutherford, a farmer, and his wife Martha Thompson, a schoolteacher.[13][14] Both of his parents were immigrants: James from Perth, Scotland, and Martha from Hornchurch, Essex, England. Rutherford's birth certificate incorrectly reads 'Earnest' due to a clerical error during registration.[15]
Rutherford first studied at Havelock School and Nelson College before winning a scholarship to study at Canterbury College, University of New Zealand, where he participated in the debating society and played rugby.[16] At Canterbury, he was awarded a complex BA in Latin, English, and Maths in 1892, a MA in Mathematics and Physical Science in 1893, and a BSc in Chemistry and Geology in 1894.[17][18]
Thereafter, he invented a new form of radio receiver, and in 1895 Rutherford was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851,[19] to travel to England for postgraduate study at the Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge.[20] In 1897, he was awarded a BA Research Degree and the Coutts-Trotter Studentship from Trinity College, Cambridge.[17]
When Rutherford began his studies at Cambridge, he was among the first 'aliens' (those without a Cambridge degree) allowed to do research at the university, and was additionally honoured to study under the mentorship of J. J. Thomson.[1]
With Thomson's encouragement, he detected radio waves at 0.5 miles (800 m), and briefly held the world record for the distance over which electromagnetic waves could be detected, though when he presented his results at the British Association meeting in 1896, he discovered he had been outdone by Guglielmo Marconi, whose radio waves had sent a message across nearly 10 miles (16 km).[21]
Again under Thomson's leadership, Rutherford had worked on the conductive effects of X-rays on gases, which led to the discovery of the electron, first presented by Thomson in 1897.[22][23] Hearing of Henri Becquerel's experience with uranium, Rutherford started to explore its radioactivity, discovering two types that differed from X-rays in their penetrating power. Continuing his research in Canada, he coined the terms alpha ray and beta ray in 1899 to describe the two distinct types of radiation.[24]
In 1898, Rutherford was accepted to the chair of Macdonald Professor of physics position at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, under Thomson's recommendation.[25] In 1901, he earned a DSc from the University of New Zealand.[20]
From 1900 to 1903, he was joined at McGill by the young chemist Frederick Soddy (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1921) for whom he set the problem of identifying the noble gas emitted by the radioactive element thorium, a substance which was itself radioactive and would coat other substances. Once he had eliminated all the normal chemical reactions, Soddy suggested that it must be one of the inert gases, which they named thoron. This substance was later found to be 220Rn, an isotope of radon.[26][17] They also found another substance they called Thorium X, later identified as 224Rn, and kept on finding traces of helium. They also worked with samples of "Uranium X" (protactinium) from William Crookes and radium from Marie Curie. Rutherford further investigated thoron in conjunction with R.B. Owens and found that a sample of radioactive material of any size invariably took the same amount of time for half the sample to decay (in this case, 111⁄2 minutes), a phenomenon for which he coined the term "half-life."[27]
Rutherford and Soddy published their "Law of Radioactive Change" to account for all their experiments. Until then, atoms were assumed to be the indestructible basis of all matter and although Curie had suggested that radioactivity was an atomic phenomenon, the idea of the atoms of radioactive substances breaking up was a radically new idea. Rutherford and Soddy demonstrated that radioactivity involved the spontaneous disintegration of atoms into other, as yet, unidentified matter. [17]
In 1903, Rutherford considered a type of radiation discovered (but not named) by French chemist Paul Villard in 1900, as an emission from radium, and realised that this observation must represent something different from his own alpha and beta rays, due to its very much greater penetrating power. Rutherford therefore gave this third type of radiation the name of gamma ray.[24] All three of Rutherford's terms are in standard use today – other types of radioactive decay have since been discovered, but Rutherford's three types are among the most common.
In 1904, Rutherford suggested that radioactivity provides a source of energy sufficient to explain the existence of the Sun for the many millions of years required for the slow biological evolution on Earth proposed by biologists such as Charles Darwin. The physicist Lord Kelvin had argued earlier for a much younger Earth[a] based on the insufficiency of known energy sources, but Rutherford pointed out at a lecture attended by Kelvin that radioactivity could solve this problem.[28] Later that year, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society,[29] and in 1907, he returned to Britain to take the chair of physics at the Victoria University of Manchester.[30]
In Manchester, Rutherford continued his work with alpha radiation. In conjunction with Hans Geiger, he developed zinc sulfide scintillation screens and ionisation chambers to count alphas. By dividing the total charge they produced by the number counted, Rutherford decided that the charge on the alpha was two.[31] In late 1907, Ernest Rutherford and Thomas Royds allowed alphas to penetrate a very thin window into an evacuated tube. As they sparked the tube into discharge, the spectrum obtained from it changed, as the alphas accumulated in the tube. Eventually, the clear spectrum of helium gas appeared, proving that alphas were at least ionised helium atoms, and probably helium nuclei.[32] The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1908 was awarded to Ernest Rutherford "for his investigations into the disintegration of the elements, and the chemistry of radioactive substances".[33]
Rutherford continued to make ground breaking discoveries long after receiving the Nobel prize in 1908. Along with Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden in 1909, he carried out the Geiger–Marsden experiment, which demonstrated the nuclear nature of atoms by deflecting alpha particles passing through a thin gold foil.[34] Rutherford was inspired to ask Geiger and Marsden in this experiment to look for alpha particles with very high deflection angles, of a type not expected from any theory of matter at that time.[35][36] Such deflections, though rare, were found, and proved to be a smooth but high-order function of the deflection angle. It was Rutherford's interpretation of this data that led him to formulate the Rutherford model of the atom in 1911 – that a very small charged nucleus, containing much of the atom's mass, was orbited by low-mass electrons.[37]
In 1912, Rutherford was joined by Niels Bohr (who postulated that electrons moved in specific orbits). Bohr adapted Rutherford's nuclear structure to be consistent with Max Planck's quantum theory, and the resulting Rutherford–Bohr model is considered valid to this day.[17]
During World War I, Rutherford worked on a top secret project to solve the practical problems of submarine detection. Both Rutherford and Paul Langevin suggested the use of piezoelectricity, and Rutherford successfully developed a device which measured its output. The use of piezoelectricity then became essential to the development of ultrasound as it is known today. The claim that Rutherford developed sonar, however, is a misconception, as subaquatic detection technologies utilize Langevin's transducer.[38][39]
Together with H.G. Moseley, Rutherford developed the atomic numbering system in 1913. Rutherford and Moseley's experiments used cathode rays to bombard various elements with a stream of electrons and observed that each element responded in a consistent and distinct manner. Their research was the first to assert that each element could be defined by the properties of its inner structures – an observation which later led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus.[17] This research led Rutherford to theorize that the hydrogen atom (at the time the least massive entity known to bear a positive charge) was a sort of "positive electron" – a component of every atomic element.[40][41]
It was not until 1919 that Rutherford expanded upon his research of the "positive electron" with a series of experiments beginning shortly before the end of his time at Manchester. He found that nitrogen and other light elements ejected a proton, which he called a "hydrogen atom", when hit with α (alpha) particles.[17] In particular, he showed that particles ejected by alpha particles colliding with hydrogen have unit charge and 1/4 the momentum of alpha particles.[42]
Rutherford returned to the Cavendish in 1919, succeeding J. J. Thomson as the Cavendish professor and Director, up until his death in 1937.[43] During his tenure, Nobel Prizes were awarded to James Chadwick for discovering the neutron (in 1932), John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton for an experiment which was to be known as splitting the atom using a particle accelerator, and Edward Appleton for demonstrating the existence of the ionosphere.
In 1919–1920, Rutherford continued his research on the "hydrogen atom" to confirm that alpha particles breakdown nitrogen nuclei and affirm the nature of the products. This result showed Rutherford that hydrogen nuclei were a part of nitrogen nuclei (and by inference, probably other nuclei as well). Such a construction had been suspected for many years on the basis of atomic weights which were whole numbers of that of hydrogen; see Prout's hypothesis. Hydrogen was known to be the lightest element, and its nuclei presumably the lightest nuclei. Now, because of all these considerations, Rutherford decided that a hydrogen nucleus was possibly a fundamental building block of all nuclei, and also possibly a new fundamental particle as well, since nothing was known from the nucleus that was lighter. Thus, confirming and extending the work of Wilhelm Wien who in 1898 discovered the proton in streams of ionized gas,[44] Rutherford postulated the hydrogen nucleus to be a new particle in 1920, which he dubbed the proton.[45]
In 1921, while working with Niels Bohr, Rutherford theorized about the existence of neutrons, (which he had christened in his 1920 Bakerian Lecture), which could somehow compensate for the repelling effect of the positive charges of protons by causing an attractive nuclear force and thus keep the nuclei from flying apart from the repulsion between protons. The only alternative to neutrons was the existence of "nuclear electrons" which would counteract some of the proton charges in the nucleus, since by then it was known that nuclei had about twice the mass that could be accounted for if they were simply assembled from hydrogen nuclei (protons). But how these nuclear electrons could be trapped in the nucleus, was a mystery. Rutherford is widely quoted as saying, regarding the results of these experiments: "It was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you."[46]
Rutherford's theory of neutrons was proved in 1932 by his associate James Chadwick, who recognized neutrons immediately when they were produced by other scientists and later himself, in bombarding beryllium with alpha particles. In 1935, Chadwick was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery.[47]
A long-standing myth existed, at least as early as 1948,[48][49] running at least to 2017, that Rutherford was the first scientist to observe and report an artificial transmutation of a stable element into another element: nitrogen into oxygen. It was thought by many people to be one of Rutherford's greatest accomplishments.[50][51] The New Zealand government even issued a commemorative stamp in the belief that the nitrogen-to-oxygen discovery belonged to Rutherford.[52] Beginning in 2017, many scientific institutions corrected their versions of this history to indicate that the discovery credit for the reaction belongs to Patrick Blackett.[53] Rutherford did detect the ejected proton in 1919 and interpreted it as evidence for disintegration of the nitrogen nucleus (to lighter nuclei). In 1925, Blackett showed that the actual product is oxygen and identified the true reaction as 14N + α → 17O + p. Rutherford therefore recognized "that the nucleus may increase rather than diminish in mass as the result of collisions in which the proton is expelled".[54]
Rutherford received significant recognition in his home country of New Zealand, and was first awarded the Hector Memorial Medal in 1916.[55] In 1925, Rutherford pushed calls to the New Zealand Government to support education and research, which led to the formation of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) in the following year.[56] Between 1925 and 1930, he served as President of the Royal Society, and later as president of the Academic Assistance Council which helped almost 1,000 university refugees from Germany.[6] He was appointed to the Order of Merit in the 1925 New Year Honours[57] and raised to the peerage as Baron Rutherford of Nelson, New Zealand and of Cambridge in the County of Cambridge in 1931,[58][59] a title that became extinct upon his unexpected death in 1937. In 1933, Rutherford was one of the two inaugural recipients of the T. K. Sidey Medal, set up by the Royal Society of New Zealand as an award for outstanding scientific research.[60][61]
Additionally, Rutherford received a number of awards from the British Crown. He was knighted in 1914, awarded an Order of Merit in 1925, and made a Baron in 1931, decorating his coat of arms with a kiwi and a Māori warrior.[62][63]
In 1900, Rutherford married Mary Georgina Newton (1876–1954),[64] to whom he had become engaged before leaving New Zealand, at St Paul's Anglican Church, Papanui in Christchurch.[65][66] 
They had one daughter, Eileen Mary (1901–1930), who married the physicist Ralph Fowler. Beyond science, Rutherford's hobbies included golf and motoring.[17]
For some time before his death, Rutherford had a small hernia, which he had neglected to have fixed, and it became strangulated, rendering him violently ill. Despite an emergency operation in London, he died four days afterwards at age 66 of what physicians termed "intestinal paralysis", at Cambridge on 19 October 1937.[67] After cremation at Golders Green Crematorium,[67] he was given the high honour of burial in Westminster Abbey, near Isaac Newton and other illustrious British scientists such as Charles Darwin.[17][68]
Rutherford is considered to be among the greatest scientists in history. At the opening session of the 1938 Indian Science Congress, which Rutherford had been expected to preside over before his death, astrophysicist James Jeans spoke in his place and deemed him "one of the greatest scientists of all time", saying:
In his flair for the right line of approach to a problem, as well as in the simple directness of his methods of attack, [Rutherford] often reminds us of Faraday, but he had two great advantages which Faraday did not possess, first, exuberant bodily health and energy, and second, the opportunity and capacity to direct a band of enthusiastic co-workers. Great though Faraday's output of work was, it seems to me that to match Rutherford's work in quantity as well as in quality, we must go back to Newton. In some respects he was more fortunate than Newton. Rutherford was ever the happy warrior – happy in his work, happy in its outcome, and happy in its human contacts.[69]Rutherford is known as "the father of nuclear physics" because his research, and work done under him as laboratory director, established the nuclear structure of the atom and the essential nature of radioactive decay as a nuclear process.[5][70][22] Patrick Blackett, a research fellow working under Rutherford, using natural alpha particles, demonstrated induced nuclear transmutation. Rutherford's team later, using protons from an accelerator, demonstrated artificially-induced nuclear reactions and transmutation.[71]
Rutherford died too early to see Leó Szilárd's idea of controlled nuclear chain reactions come into being. However, a speech of Rutherford's about his artificially-induced transmutation in lithium, printed on 12 September 1933 London paper The Times, was reported by Szilárd to have been his inspiration for thinking of the possibility of a controlled energy-producing nuclear chain reaction.[72]
Rutherford's speech touched on the 1932 work of his students John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton in "splitting" lithium into alpha particles by bombardment with protons from a particle accelerator they had constructed. Rutherford realized that the energy released from the split lithium atoms was enormous, but he also realized that the energy needed for the accelerator, and its essential inefficiency in splitting atoms in this fashion, made the project an impossibility as a practical source of energy (accelerator-induced fission of light elements remains too inefficient to be used in this way, even today). Rutherford's speech in part, read:
We might in these processes obtain very much more energy than the proton supplied, but on the average we could not expect to obtain energy in this way. It was a very poor and inefficient way of producing energy, and anyone who looked for a source of power in the transformation of the atoms was talking moonshine. But the subject was scientifically interesting because it gave insight into the atoms.[73][74]The element rutherfordium, Rf, Z=104, was named in honor of Rutherford in 1997.[75]



Information box
{'Born': 'Ernest Rutherford\n30 August 1871\nBrightwater, Colony of New Zealand', 'Died': '19 October 1937 (aged 66)\nCambridge, England', 'Resting place': 'Westminster Abbey', 'Alma mater': 'University of New Zealand\nCavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge', 'Known for': 'show\nSee list', 'Spouse': 'Mary Georgina Newton\n(m. 1900)', 'Children': '1', 'Awards': 'show\nSee list', 'Fields': 'Radioactivityatomic physicsnuclear physics', 'Institutions': 'McGill University\nUniversity of Manchester\nUniversity of Cambridge', 'Academic advisors': 'Alexander Bickerton\nJ. J. Thomson[1]', 'Doctoral students': 'show\nSee list', 'Other notable students': 'show\nSee list', 'Influenced': 'Henry Moseley\nHans Geiger\nAlbert Beaumont Wood', 'Preceded by': 'Charles Scott Sherrington', 'Succeeded by': 'Frederick Gowland Hopkins'}