39809,
Etiquette,
This page offers some principles of etiquette, also referred to as "Wikiquette", on how to work with others on Wikipedia.
Wikipedia's contributors come from many different countries and cultures. We have many different views, perspectives, opinions, and backgrounds, sometimes varying widely. Treating others with respect is key to collaborating effectively in building an international online encyclopedia.
Avoid use of unexplained scare quotes and other means of implying criticism or making indirect criticism when you are writing in edit comments and talk pages. Write clearly, plainly and concisely in a way that enables other editors to easily respond to you.
Keep in mind that sarcasm cannot easily be conveyed in writing and may be misinterpreted. Insinuation and double entendre should be avoided when expressing constructive criticism. This also helps the editor receiving criticism to correctly understand you and respond to your concerns and may particularly help editors for whom English is not a first language or who have trouble understanding written English.
When this style of communication is necessary in the interest of being concise or illustrative, it is best to explain the intended meaning of your use of scare quotes or other indirection immediately afterward.
Of course criticism communicated in any manner and concerning any subject must be civil, should assume good faith as described in the relevant guideline, should not constitute biting of newcomers, and should comply with other Wikipedia policies and guidelines. If directed generally towards an editor's behavior or other aspects of talk page commentary, criticism must not constitute a personal attack as described in the "no personal attacks" policy. See also the essay "Avoid personal remarks" for a viewpoint on the latter form of criticism.
When dealing with suspected violations of Wikipedia:Neutral point of view:
Parting words of advice from Larry Sanger:[1]
For more advice of a similar nature, see User:Kingturtle/WikiPrinciples.


