9241,
Euglenozoa,

Euglenozoa are a large group of flagellate Discoba. They include a variety of common free-living species, as well as a few important parasites, some of which infect humans. Euglenozoa are represented by four major groups, i.e., Kinetoplastea, Diplonemea, Euglenida, and Symbiontida. Euglenozoa are unicellular, mostly around 15–40 μm (0.00059–0.00157 in) in size, although some euglenids get up to 500 μm (0.020 in) long.[2]
Most euglenozoa have two flagella, which are inserted parallel to one another in an apical or subapical pocket. In some these are associated with a cytostome or mouth, used to ingest bacteria or other small organisms. This is supported by one of three sets of microtubules that arise from the flagellar bases; the other two support the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the cell.[3]
Some other euglenozoa feed through absorption, and many euglenids possess chloroplasts, the only eukaryotes outside Diaphoretickes to do so without performing kleptoplasty,[4][failed verification] and so obtain energy through photosynthesis. These chloroplasts are surrounded by three membranes and contain chlorophylls A and B, along with other pigments, so are probably derived from a  green alga, captured long ago in an endosymbiosis by a basal euglenozoan.  Reproduction occurs exclusively through cell division.  During mitosis, the nuclear membrane remains intact, and the spindle microtubules form inside of it.[3]
The group is characterized by the ultrastructure of the flagella.  In addition to the normal supporting microtubules or axoneme, each contains a rod (called paraxonemal), which has a tubular structure in one flagellum and a latticed structure in the other.  Based on this, two smaller groups have been included here: the diplonemids and Postgaardi.[5]
Historically, euglenozoans have been treated as either plants or animals, depending on whether they belong to largely photosynthetic groups or not. Hence they have names based on either the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICNafp) or the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN). For example, one family has the name Euglenaceae under the ICNafp and the name Euglenidae under the ICZN. As another example, the genus name Dinema is acceptable under the ICZN, but illegitimate under the ICNafp, as it is a later homonym of an orchid genus, so that the synonym Dinematomonas must be used instead.[6]
The Euglenozoa are generally accepted as monophyletic. They are related to Percolozoa; the two share mitochondria with disk-shaped cristae, which only occurs in a few other groups.[7]
Both probably belong to a larger group of eukaryotes called the Excavata.[8] This grouping, though, has been challenged.[9]
The phylogeny based on the work of Cavalier-Smith (2016):[10]
Hemistasiidae
Eupelagonemidae
Diplonemidae
Ichthyobodonidae
Rhynchobodo
Neobodonidae
Parabodonidae
Bodonidae
Trypanosomatidae
Bihospitidae
Postgaardidae
Calkinsiidae
Entosiphonidae
Serpenomonadidae
Decastavidae
Keelungiidae
Sphenomonadidae
Petalomonadidae
Lentomonadidae
Ploeotiidae
 
Peranemidae
Anisonemidae
Neometanemidae
Distigmidae
Astasiidae
Teloproctidae
 
Rapazidae
Eutreptiaceae
Euglenamorphaceae
Phacaceae
Euglenaceae
A consensus phylogeny following the review by Kostygov et al. (2021):[6]
Ichthyobodonidae
Perkinselidae
Allobodonidae
Neobodonidae
Rhynchomonadidae
Cryptobiidae
Trypanoplasmatidae
Bodonidae
Trypanosomatidae
Diplonemidae
Eupelagonemidae
Hemistasiidae
Petalomonadida
Alistosa
Olkasia
Anisonemidae
Aphagea
Rapazidae
Eutreptiaceae/Eutreptiidae
Euglenaceae/Euglenidae
Phacaceae/Phacidae
Peranemida
Bihospites
Calkinsia
Postgaardi
The following classification of Euglenozoa is as described by Cavalier-Smith in 2016,[10] modified to include the new subphylum Plicomonada according to Cavalier-Smith et al (2017).[11]
Phylum Euglenozoa Cavalier-Smith 1981 emend. Simpson 1997 [Euglenobionta]
Phylum Euglenozoa Cavalier-Smith 1981 emend. Simpson 1997[6]


