10691,
FalklandIslanders,
Falkland Islanders, also called Falklanders[3] and nicknamed Kelpers, are the people of the British Overseas Territory of the Falkland Islands.
The Islanders are British, albeit with a distinct identity of their own:
British cultural, economic, social, political and educational values create a unique British-like, Falkland Islands.  Yet Islanders feel distinctly different from their fellow citizens who reside in the United Kingdom.  This might have something to do with geographical isolation or with living on a smaller island – perhaps akin to those British people not feeling European.They also see themselves as no different from other immigrant nations, including those of neighbouring South America:
We are as much a people as those in Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil and Chile and many other South American countries whose inhabitants are of principally European, Indigenous or African descent."Kelpers" is a nickname given to Falkland Islanders because the islands are surrounded by large seaweeds called kelp.[6][7] This term is no longer used as commonly as it once was (largely because it is considered racist and insulting by some islanders when used by Argentines).[8][better source needed]
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
With retrospective effect from 1 January 1983, as provided in the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983, the Falkland Islanders have been full British citizens.
About 70 percent are of British descent, primarily as a result of Scottish and Welsh immigration to the islands.[16] The native-born inhabitants call themselves "Islanders"; the term "Kelpers", from the kelp which grows profusely around the islands, is still used in the Islands. People from the United Kingdom who have obtained Falkland Island status are known locally as 'belongers'.[17]
A few Islanders are of French, Gibraltarian, Portuguese, and Scandinavian descent. Some are the descendants of whalers who reached the Islands during the last two centuries. There is also a small minority of South American, mainly Chilean origin, and in more recent times many people from Saint Helena have also come to work and live in the Islands.[18]
The most predominant religion is Christianity, of which the primary denominations are Church of England, Roman Catholic, United Free Church, and Lutheran. Smaller numbers are Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-day Adventists, and Greek Orthodox; with the latter being due to Greek fishermen passing through.[citation needed] There is also a congregation of the Baháʼí Faith.[19] The islands are the home of the Apostolic Prefecture of the Falkland Islands.
The official language of the islands is English.[20] The Falklands English vernacular has a fair amount of borrowed Spanish words (often modified or corrupted); they are particularly numerous, and indeed dominant, in the local horse-related terminology. For instance, the Islanders use 'alizan', 'colorao', 'negro', 'blanco', 'gotiao', 'picasso', 'sarco', 'rabincana' etc. for certain horse colours and looks, or 'bosal', 'cabresta', 'bastos', 'cinch', 'conjinilla', 'meletas', 'tientas', 'manares' etc. for various items of horse gear.[21]
Knowledge of Spanish as a foreign language is fairly widespread, as it is a compulsory subject in school, being the lingua franca in much of mainland South America. As the schools follow the English education system, European Spanish as prescribed by the Real Academia in Madrid is taught, rather than a South American variety of the language, but Falkland Islanders may use seseo pronunciation typical of South American dialect. There is a large population of native Hispanophones in the islands, consisting of mostly Chileans and some Argentinians, and the language is also present in some placenames.
There are more than 30 different sports clubs on the Falklands, including badminton, clay-pigeon shooting, cricket, football, golf, hockey, netball, rugby union, sailing, swimming, table tennis and volleyball.[22] The Falklands compete in the Commonwealth Games and in the biennial Island Games.[23] Louis Baillon is the only Falkland Islander to have become an Olympic champion, as a member of the British field hockey team which won a gold medal in 1908.


