23429,
ForeignrelationsofParaguay,
Paraguayan foreign policy has concentrated on maintaining good relations with its neighbors, and it has been an active proponent of regional co-operation. It is a member of the United Nations and has served one term in the UN Security Council in 1967-1969. It maintains membership in several international financial institutions, including the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund. It also belongs to the Organization of American States, the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), the Rio Group, INTERPOL, MERCOSUR (the Southern Cone Common Market) and UNASUR.
At the political level, diplomatic affairs and international relations of Paraguay are officially handled by the Ministry of Foreign Relations, which answers to the executive branch of the government.  Minister of Foreign Relations 2018 -2019 was Luis Alberto Castiglioni.[1]
Unlike any other country in South America, Paraguay recognizes the Republic of China instead of the People's Republic of China. Paraguay presently is the largest country maintaining official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China.
Paraguay recognizes the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.
In January 2014, Paraguay officially suspends its relations with Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.[3]
In 2009 Bolivian President Evo Morales and Paraguayan President Fernando Lugo signed an agreement settling a border dispute, which had led to the Chaco War in the 1930s. President Lugo expressed the hope that natural resources could now "be developed and used by both countries" [10] Relations, as with many countries in the area, have had increased tension since the Paraguay impeachment in 2012.
Paraguay–Brazil relations have improved greatly after Brazilian President Lula's decision in 2009 to triple its payments to Paraguay for energy from a massive hydro-electric dam on their border, ending a long-running dispute. Under the accord, Brazil will pay Paraguay $360m a year for energy from the jointly-operated Itaipu plant. Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva called it a "historic agreement" and the deal slated as a political victory for former Paraguayan President Fernando Lugo.[11]
In February 2019, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro praised the late military strongman of Paraguay, Alfredo Stroessner, calling him "a man of vision." Bolsonaro made the comments during a ceremony at the Itaipu hydroelectric dam on the countries' shared border. At his side was his close ally, Paraguayan right-wing President Mario Abdo Benitez.[12]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on April 18, 1881.
A military training agreement with Asunción, giving immunity to US soldiers, caused some concern after media reports initially reported that a base housing 20,000 US soldiers was being built at Mariscal Estigarribia within 200 km of Argentina and Bolivia, and 300 km of Brazil, near an airport which could receive large planes (B-52, C-130 Hercules, etc.) which the Paraguayan Air Forces do not have.[19][20]
In September 2009 Paraguay's President Fernando Lugo revoked plans for US troops to hold joint military exercises and development projects after stating that he no longer thinks that hosting troops taking part in the US department of defence's "New Horizons" programme was worthwhile. President Lugo referenced strong regional opposition from countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Venezuela, Bolivia and Ecuador to the expansion of US military bases in Colombia in his decision.[21]
Relations between Paraguay and Venezuela  improved during Paraguay's  leftist President Fernando Lugo (2008-2012), a change from 61 unbroken years of Colorado party rule. President Lugo supported Venezuela's entry into Mercosur however the Colorado Party's influence in Paraguay's Congress and Senate retarded this expansion.
Paraguay and Venezuela restarted negotiations on an unpaid debt of $250 million owed by Paraguayan oil company Petropar to its counterpart Petróleos de Venezuela after the Presidents of Paraguay and Venezuela met to deal with the financing.[24]
In January, 2019, Paraguay cut its diplomatic relations with Venezuela, considering the Venezuelan government of President Nicolas Maduro illegitimate due to disputed election.[25]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on July 2. 1992.[26] Paraguay is accredited to Armenia through its embassy in Moscow, Russia. 
Both countries established diplomatic relations on April 20, 2004.[27]
Paraguay recognizes the Republic of China as the legitimate government of China.
Australia's positive relations with Paraguay are growing. In 2011, Paraguay opened an embassy in Canberra, Australia opened a consulate in Asunción. As agricultural producers and exporters, they work together to achieve fairer international trade in agricultural products through membership of the Cairns Group and cooperation in other multilateral fora. Australia is also increasing its engagement with Paraguay through development cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. An increasing number of Paraguayan students are pursuing their education at Australian institutions.[53]
Paraguay is a member of the following international organizations:[58]
CAN (associate), FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD (also known as the World Bank), ICAO, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol,  IOC, IOM, IPU, ISO (correspondent), ITSO, ITU, ITUC, LAES, LAIA, Mercosur, MIGA, MINURSO, MINUSTAH, MONUSCO, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, Rio Group, UN, UNASUR, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, Union Latina, UNMIL, UNMIS, UNOCI, UNWTO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO


