27460,
ForeignrelationsofEswatini,
Eswatini is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the African Union, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the Southern African Development Community. Currently, the Kingdom of Eswatini maintains 11 embassies and High Commissions along with 15 consulates and other representations around the world, while there are five embassies and High Commissions in Eswatini as well as 14 consulates and other representations. 
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 3 May 2013.[2]
Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1968.[8]
Eswatini established diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (ROC) commonly known as "Taiwan", on 16 September 1968. Eswatini has an embassy in Taipei and ROC has an embassy in Mbabane. As of 2018, it is last African country to recognize the ROC instead of the PRC as the sole representative of "China".
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 20 May 2016.[23]
Both countries established diplomatic relations in September 1968.[29]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on February 27, 2013.[42]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 12 December 1990.[55]
See Eswatini–Russia relations
Both countries established diplomatic relations began on 6 November 1968.[63]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 6 August 1969 when Ambassador of Switzerland to South Africa, Mr. R. Hunziker presented his credentials to King of Swaziland Sobhuza II.[66]
The United States assists Eswatini with a number of HIV/AIDS initiatives and programs implemented through the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the Peace Corps, African Development Foundation, the Department of Labor, and the Department of Defense. In addition, the U.S. supports small enterprise development, education, military training, institutional and human resources development, agricultural development, and trade capacity building.
The U.S. is also the largest bilateral donor to the Global Fund, Eswatini's principal HIV/AIDS funding source. The U.S. Government sends about 4 Swazi professionals to the United States each year, from both the public and private sectors, primarily for master's degrees, and about 5 others for three- to four-week International Visitor programs.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on May 21, 2013.[75]
Eswatini was a British protectorate until 1968, when it became an independent native monarchy within the Commonwealth of Nations, when the then Paramount Chief of Swaziland, Sobhuza II became King of Swaziland.


