19156,
ForeignrelationsoftheMarshallIslands,
The Republic of the Marshall Islands has established bilateral diplomatic relations with about 105 states. Regional cooperation, through membership in various regional and international organizations, is a key element in its foreign policy.[1]
The Marshall Islands became a member of the United Nations on September 17, 1991. The Marshall Islands maintains embassies in the United States, Fiji, South Korea, Japan, and the Republic of China (Taiwan). They also maintain a consulate in Honolulu, Hawaii and in Springdale, Arkansas, United States.
In May 2005, Chen Shui-bian, President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), became the first foreign head of state to make an official visit to the Marshall Islands.
List of countries with which the Marshall Islands maintains diplomatic relations with:
As per the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India, India established diplomatic relations with Republic of the Marshall Islands in April 1995. Development assistance from India has included a grant of US$100,000 in June 2008 for a solar street lighting project in the capital city of Majuro and grant of 5 ITEC scholarships in November 2010. Marshall Islands has been supportive of issues of importance to India, particularly Indian candidature to international organizations. It supported India's candidature for the non-permanent membership of the UN Security Council for the 2011–12 term. Presently, there are about 10 Indian nationals in the Marshall Islands.[9]
The Marshall Islands officially recognised the independence of the Republic of Kosovo on the 17 April 2008.[10] Kosovo and the Marshall Islands established diplomatic relations on 27 October 2013.
The Marshall Islands and Micronesia share very good relations, as they are both bound by Compacts of Free Association with the United States.
The Marshall Islands and Palau share very good relations, as they are both bound by Compacts of Free Association with the United States.
The establishment of diplomatic relations between the Marshall Islands and the Republic of Korea (South Korea) began on 16 March 1991.[13]
The Marshall Islands were once part of the Spanish East Indies.
The Marshall Islands and the United States maintain a strong and stable relationship under the Compact of Free Association. The US has full responsibility in the country's defense, financial aid, and social services. In return, the U.S. provides healthcare services, security, and freedom of movement between U.S., American Samoan, and Marshall Islander citizens. In international politics, Marshall Islands has often voted with the United States with respect to United Nations General Assembly resolutions.[15]
Hong Kong national security law
In June 2020, the Marshall Islands openly opposed the Hong Kong national security law[18]


