27237,
ForeignrelationsofSaintVincentandtheGrenadines,

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines maintains close ties to the US, Canada, and the United Kingdom, and cooperates with regional political and economic organizations such as the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and CARICOM. St. Vincent and the Grenadines is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organization of American States, and the Association of Caribbean States (ACS). Saint Vincent is also the smallest nation ever to be on the United Nations Security Council.[1]
In May 1997, Prime Minister Mitchell joined 14 other Caribbean leaders and U.S. President Bill Clinton during the first-ever U.S.-regional summit in Bridgetown, Barbados. The summit strengthened the basis for regional cooperation on justice and counternarcotics issues, finance and development, and trade.
Saint Vincent is a transshipment point for South American illicit drugs destined for the US and Europe.
List of countries which Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has diplomatic relations with:[2]
St. Vincent and the Grenadines maintains close relations with Cuba, which provides a number of scholarship and other exchange programs for Vincentians, particularly in the field of healthcare.
Denmark is represented in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines by its embassy in Mexico City and an honorary consulate in Kingstown.[23]
Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations, of the Organization of American States and of the Caribbean Community.
Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations, of the Organization of American States and of the Caribbean Community.
As a member of CARICOM, St. Vincent and the Grenadines strongly backed efforts by the United States to implement UN Security Council Resolution 940, designed to facilitate the departure of Haiti's de facto authorities from power. Saint Vincent agreed to contribute personnel to the multinational force, which restored the democratically elected government of Haiti in October 1994.
Ireland is represented in Dominica through its embassy in Washington DC, United States.[30][31]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on January 28, 1993.[33]
The establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of Korea and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines began on October 28, 1979.[42]
Both countries are full members of the Organization of American States and of the Caribbean Community.
Both countries established consular relations in 1985 and diplomatic relations in 2001.[43]
[44]
Saint Vincent protests Venezuela's claim to give full effect to Aves (Bird) Island, which creates a Venezuelan EEZ/continental shelf extending over a large portion of the Caribbean Sea.
^These three form the SSS islands that with the ABC islands comprise the Dutch Caribbean, of which *the BES islands are not direct Kingdom constituents but subsumed with the country of the Netherlands.
†Physiographically, these continental islands are not part of the volcanic Windward Islands arc, although sometimes grouped with them culturally and politically.
ǂDisputed territories administered by Guyana. ~Disputed territories administered by Colombia.


