3519,
ForeignrelationsofBarbados,

This article deals with the diplomatic affairs, foreign policy and international relations of Barbados.
At the political level, these matters are officially handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which answers to the Prime Minister. The Minister of Foreign Affairs, since May 2018 is Jerome X. Walcott.
Barbados is a moderate political and economic power in the Caribbean region.
Between independence in 1966 and the 1990s, Barbados has used a pro business and investment policy to expand its influence in the world. Through the usage of its network of international bilateral relations, the country has been able to maintain an independent foreign policy. Barbados' recent policy has been to focus and strengthen ties with nations that country feels will enhance its diplomacy or foreign trade. Barbados has sought to engage in multilateral diplomacy through the United Nations, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the Association of Caribbean States (ACS), the group of ACP countries, the Organization of American States, and several other agencies which it is engaged. In 2008 Barbados and the other members of CARICOM signed an Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the European Union and its European Commission.[1] The deal covers CARICOM's membership in the Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM). CARIFORUM in turn is a part of the Group of African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) States. The agreement outlines Barbados' future development and trade ties with the European Union, and serves as a blueprint for future relations between both trading blocs under the Cotonou Agreement and the Lomé Convention.[2]
Barbados has placed an emphasis on a furtherance of relations with the nations of Africa where the majority of islanders have ancestral connection.[3][4][5][6][7] A prior CARICOM-Africa summit were held with future agenda to be formulated.[8][9]
As a small nation, the primary thrust of Barbados' diplomatic activity has been within international organisations. Currently Barbados has established official diplomatic relations with 105 countries around the globe.
In 1965, Barbados, Antigua and Barbuda, Guyana, and Trinidad and Tobago established the Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA). Following independence from the United Kingdom in 1966, Barbados went on to become a founding member of many other international organizations.
On 4 July 1973, the founding nations of Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, and Jamaica signed the original Treaty of Chaguaramas in Trinidad thus establishing the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM). The agreement to establish CARICOM wound up succeeded the CARIFTA organisation. By the following year many of the remaining English-speaking Caribbean states followed suit and also joined CARICOM by May 1974, bring it slowly to the 15 members it has today.
Barbados also is a member of the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), established in 1970, with headquarters in Wildey, Saint Michael (Bridgetown). The eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System (RSS), which associates Barbados with six nations of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) is also based in Barbados. In July 1994, Barbados joined the newly established Association of Caribbean States (ACS).
In 2002 the United Nations opened a building in the Marine Gardens area of Hastings found in the Parish of Christ Church the facility simply called the United Nations House acts as a regional operations headquarters for several programmes of the United Nations in Barbados and for many of the other islands in the Eastern Caribbean region.[10]
Barbados has relations with 127 countries around the world:[11]
Antigua & Barbuda and Barbados were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations. The establishment of diplomatic relations between Barbados and Antigua and Barbuda started on 1 November 1981.
The Commonwealth of the Bahamas were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 10 July 1973.[27]
Barbados and Belize were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and Canada were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organization of American States, and the United Nations.
In 1907, the Government of Canada opened a Trade Commissioner Service to the Caribbean region located in Bridgetown, Barbados.
Barbados is accredited in Chile through its embassy in Caracas, (Venezuela). Chile is accredited to Barbados from its embassy in Port of Spain, (Trinidad and Tobago) and maintains an honorary consulate in Bridgetown. Barbados and Chile formally established diplomatic relations on 3 October 1967.[32] Chile was the first Latin American country which Barbados formally established formal diplomatic relations.[33][34]
Barbados and the Republic of Cuba are members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Belt & Road Initiative, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados was one of the first nations in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) bloc to form relations with the Republic of Cuba in 1972. On October 6, 1976 the Cubana de Aviación Flight 455 crashed off the coast of Barbados after a U.S. assisted terrorist plot. The countries have signed a number of bilateral deals including: A joint 1996 bilateral Free Trade Agreement that was later superseded by the 2005 Cuba-CARICOM free trade agreement, a 1999 Bilateral Investment Treaties (BIT), and a 2003 Double Taxation Agreement (DTA). In recent years Cuba has offered scholarships to students in Barbados to attend its medical schools such as Escuela Latin Americana de Medicina.
Barbados and the Commonwealth of Dominica are members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 3 November 1978.[21]
Barbados and Grenada are two of sixteen commonwealth realms, members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and the Co-Operative Republic of Guyana are members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
The relations between Guyana and Barbados had its genesis to a time when both Guyana (then British Guiana) and Barbados were both British colonies. Shortly after Great Britain secured British Guiana from the Dutch, waves of migrants were encouraged to move and settle in Guyana. Barbados was one such location where large numbers of migrants came from. Through time Barbados and Guyana have both supported each other. With the move towards independence in the region Guyana was seen as the breadbasket of the wider Caribbean which led to yet more waves of Barbadians seeking to move to Guyana for better opportunities.
More recently the Guyanese Government has extended an offer to Barbadians.[35][36] The Guyanese government has offered to put in place an economically favourable regime towards any Barbadians that wish to relocate to Guyana and contribute towards that nation's goals in agricultural investment.[37] The announcement was made in the final days of the Owen Arthur administration by MP member Mia Motley.
In the early 1990s the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Patrick Manning pitched an initiative for Barbados, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago to enter into some form of political union or political association. This initiative was short lived and didn't proceed following the Democratic Labour Party's defeat during the 1994 elections.
In the early 1990s as a member of CARICOM, Barbados had supported efforts by the United States to implement UN Security Council Resolution 940, designed to facilitate the departure of Haiti's de facto authorities from power. The country agreed to contribute personnel to the multinational force, which restored the democratically elected government of Haiti in October 1994.
Barbados and Jamaica were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021): the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and the Federation of St. Kitts & Nevis were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and St. Lucia were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and St. Vincent & the Grenadines were once both commonwealth realms (until Barbados became a republic in 2021), members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 8 March 1978. Barbados is accredited to Suriname from Bridgetown. Suriname is represented in Barbados through its embassy in Port of Spain, (Trinidad and Tobago).
Barbados and the Republic of Suriname are members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
Barbados and the Republic of Trinidad & Tobago are members of: the Association of Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Belt & Road Initiative, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, EU-CARIFORUM, the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, the Organization of American States, the Small Island Developing States, and the United Nations.
On 11 April 2006, the 5-Member UNCLOS Annex VII Arbitral Tribunal, presided over by H.E. Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, rendered after two years of international judicial proceedings, the landmark Barbados/Trinidad and Tobago Award, which resolved the maritime boundary delimitation (in the East, Central and West sectors) to satisfaction of both Parties and committed Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago to resolve their fisheries dispute by means of concluding a new Fisheries Agreement.
In May 1997, Prime Minister Owen Arthur hosted United States President Bill Clinton and 14 other Caribbean leaders during the first-ever U.S.-regional summit in Bridgetown, Barbados. The summit strengthened the basis for regional cooperation on justice and counternarcotics issues, finance and development, and trade.
Barbados and the China established official diplomatic relations 30 May 1977.[38] Barbados-Sino diplomatic and economic relations have grown steadily over three decades.
Japan is accredited to Barbados from its embassy in Port of Spain (Trinidad and Tobago) and an honorary consulate in Bridgetown. Barbados is represented in Japan through a non-resident ambassador in Bridgetown.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 19 December 1996.[45][46] On 17 July 2013 a bilateral Open Skies Agreement (OSA) were signed between both countries.[47]
On 25 April 2014 a bilateral Singapore-Barbados Double Taxation Agreement treaty came into effect[48] with subsequent modifications in 2021.[49]
Barbados and the Republic of Korea established diplomatic relations on 15 November 1977.[50]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 8 January 1996. In 2021 the Barbados government announced that a mission will be opening in Dubai shortly in the new financial year.[1]
The Mission of Barbados to the European Union is located in Brussels, while the Delegation of the European Union to Barbados and its regional Eastern Caribbean neighbours is in Bridgetown.
Both countries have established diplomatic relations on 3 May 1968. Barbados is represented in France through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium). France is represented in Barbados through its embassy in Port of Spain (Trinidad and Tobago) and an honorary consulate in Bridgetown.
Barbados is represented in Germany through its embassy in Brussels, (Belgium) and Germany is represented in to Barbados from its embassy in Port of Spain, (Trinidad and Tobago). Barbados and West Germany formally established diplomatic relations on 14 March 1967.
The Soviet Union recognized the independence of Barbados on 30 November 1966. On 29 January 1993, Russian Federation and Barbados established formal diplomatic relations.[58][59] In 2018 both nations celebrated 25 years of diplomatic ties and pledged closer collaboration.[60][61][62] The two nations also discussed cultural exchanges and Russia working with Barbados' light oil and gas industry.[63][64] And possible scholarships to Russian schools.[65] In 2022 the Russian Foreign Minister met his counterpart in Barbados to discuss current relations and explored a future agenda with the nation including among other things the conclusion of a visa waiver agreement between both nations.[66]
The two countries are related through common history, the Commonwealth of Nations and until 2021, shared of the same Head of State, Queen Elizabeth II as their Monarch. The British High Commission was established in Bridgetown, Barbados in 1967. There is a Barbadian High Commission in London.
The Australian High Commissioner to Barbados is accredited from Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. Barbados is represented in Australia through its High Commission in Ottawa, Ontario, (Canada). Barbados maintains an honorary consul in Australia. Barbados and Australia established diplomatic relations on 7 January 1974. Both Barbados and Australia are current members of the United Nations, Commonwealth of Nations, and comprised as former parts of the British Empire.
Barbados has a number of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) with a growing list of nations. Some of which include:[73]
Barbados has a number of Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) with a growing list of nations. Some of which include:[75]
Barbados has been a member state of the Commonwealth since 1966, when it became an independent Commonwealth realm and the 27th member state of the Commonwealth.
Barbadians have held various roles within the Commonwealth of Nations such as elections observers, or even more prominently. The country's former Governor-General, Dame Nita Barrow who served on the original Eminent Persons Group of 1985-1986 researched ways to bring about an end of apartheid in South Africa.[79]
Various Commonwealth meetings hosted by Barbados:
Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Barbados was viceregally represented by the Governor-General of Barbados until 30 November 2021.
The last Governor-General of Barbados, Dame Sandra Mason was installed in as the first President of Barbados on 30 November 2021 upon Barbados becoming a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations.
On 7 December 1966 the Security Council of the United nations met to debate the membership of Barbados to the General Assembly of the United Nations. During the 1487th plenary meeting of 9 December 1966[80] it was decided that Barbados would be granted membership. Thusly Barbados became the 122nd full member of the United Nations General Assembly on 12 December 1966.[81]
The late Prime Minister Errol Walton Barrow gave a speech during the first General Assembly attended by Barbados: Telling the assembly that his country will be an exponent, "not of the diplomacy of power, but of the diplomacy of peace and prosperity. We have no quarrels to pursue and we particularly insist that we do not regard any member state as our natural opponent," he said. "We will be friends of all, satellites of none."
Barbados is also a member of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98)
Barbados has diplomatic missions headed by resident ambassadors or high commissioners in Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, and Venezuela, and at the European Union (Brussels) and the UN. It also has resident consuls general in Toronto, Miami, and New York City. Australia, Brazil, Cuba, Canada, Colombia, People's Republic of China, Guatemala, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Venezuela have ambassadors or high commissioners resident in Barbados.
While Barbados has full diplomatic relations with China, it maintains economic and cultural relations with Taiwan via Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Canada.
ACP • ACCP • ACS • AOSIS • BIS • C • CAF-BDLA(Associate) • Carib-Export • CARICOM • CARIFORUM • CARTAC • CCJ • CDB • CDERA • CITEL • CTO • CXC • CFATF • CRNM • CROSQ • CSME • ECLAC • FAO • G33 • G77 • IADB • IDB • IAEA • IBRD • ICAO • ICCt • ICFTU • ICJ • ICRM • IDA • IFAD • IFC • IFRCS • ILO • IMF • IMO • Intelsat • Interpol • IOC • IOM • IMPACS • ISO • ITU • LAES • MACHC • MIGA • NAM • OAS • OPANAL • OPCW • PAHO • Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas • RSS • SIDS • UN • UNCTAD • UNESCO • UNHCR • UNIDO • UPU • WCO • WFTU • WHO • WIPO • WMO • UNWTO • WTO
Disputes - international:
Illicit drugs:
Until 2013, Barbados has recognized the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, when it cancelled relations. In 2018, it recognized Kosovo.
^These three form the SSS islands that with the ABC islands comprise the Dutch Caribbean, of which *the BES islands are not direct Kingdom constituents but subsumed with the country of the Netherlands.
†Physiographically, these continental islands are not part of the volcanic Windward Islands arc, although sometimes grouped with them culturally and politically.
ǂDisputed territories administered by Guyana. ~Disputed territories administered by Colombia.


