23024,
ForeignrelationsofPoland,

 



The Republic of Poland is a Central European country and member of the European Union and NATO, among others. Poland wields considerable influence in Central and Eastern Europe and is a middle power in international affairs. The foreign policy of Poland is based on four basic commitments: to Atlantic co-operation, to European integration, to international development and to international law.
The Polish economy is fairly open and relies strongly on international trade. Since the collapse of communism and its re-establishment as a democratic nation, Poland has extended its responsibilities and position in European and Western affairs, supporting and establishing friendly foreign relations with both the West and with numerous European countries.
Foreign policy topics are covered in the history articles:
After regaining independence in 1989, Poland has ahead on its economic reintegration with the Western world.[1] Poland also has been an active nation in advocating European integration.
In 1994, Poland became an associate member he European Union (EU) and its defensive arm, the Western European Union (WEU). In 1996, Poland achieved full OECD membership and submitted preliminary documentation for full EU membership.
Poland formally joined the European Union in May 2004, along with the other members of the Visegrád Group.
Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz told a 2014 audience at the Wilson Center that Poland sought to join NATO as early as 1992.[2]
In 1997, Poland was invited in the first wave of NATO enlargement at the July 1997 NATO Madrid summit. In March 1999, Poland became a full member of NATO. Poland promoted its NATO candidacy through energetic participation in the Partnership for Peace (PfP) program and through intensified individual dialogue with NATO.
Poland was a part of the multinational force in Iraq.
List of countries which Poland established diplomatic relations with:[3]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on May 2, 1995.[134]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 10 June 1972.[140]
A tighter security alliance with the United States was announced in the middle of the Georgian crisis as an agreement between the two countries was reached to allow the US to install and operate an interceptor missile defense shield, a move which Russia sees explicitly targeting it and which it stated made Poland "a legit military target".[145] A high-ranking Russian military official said: "Poland in deploying [the US system] opens itself to a nuclear strike".[146]
Historically, relations have generally been close and friendly, characterized by understanding and cooperation on international front.[153]
Poland broke off relations with Israel after the Six-Day War of 1967, following most other countries of the Soviet Union controlled Eastern Bloc. Poland was the first Eastern bloc country to recognize Israel again in 1986. Full diplomatic relations have been reestablished in 1990, after the communist People's Republic of Poland was transformed into modern, democratic Poland. Government relations between Poland and Israel are steadily improving, resulting in the mutual visits of presidents and the ministers of foreign affairs.[156][157]
Poland opened its embassy in Nur-Sultan in March 1994. Kazakhstan's embassy to Poland was opened in October 2000.[159]
Malaysia has an embassy in Warsaw,[160] and Poland has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur and a consulate in Kuching.[161][162]
Austria was one of the three partitioners of Poland, along with Prussia/Germany and Russia.
[180]
Polish-French relations date several centuries, although they became really relevant only with times of French Revolution and reign of Napoleon I. Poles have been allies of Napoleon; large Polish community settled in France in the 19th century, and Poles and French were also allies during the interwar period. The official relations, having cooled down during the Cold War, have improved since the fall of communism. Currently both countries are part of the European Union and NATO.
After the creation of modern Germany in 1871, Germany was one of the three partitioners of Poland, along with Austria and Russia.
The joint Nazi-Soviet invasion of Poland of 1939 started World War II, and then until 1945, Poland was occupied by Germany and subjected to crimes against its popualtion.
During the Cold War, communist Poland had good relations with East Germany, but had strained relations with West Germany. After the fall of communism, Poland and the reunited Germany have had a mostly positive but occasionally strained relationship due to some political issues. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Germany has been a proponent of Poland's participation in NATO and the European Union.
Relations between the two states date back from the Middle Ages.  For a long time, they enjoy traditional close friendship.
Poland and Lithuania formed a close alliance and political union since 1385, which was eventually transformed into the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the greatest historic powers of Central and Eastern Europe.
The fall of communism in the years of 1989-1991 led to a formal reestablishment of relations by the Polish and Lithuanian states. Poland was highly supportive of the Lithuanian independence, and became one of the first countries to recognize independent Lithuania.[201] Despite that, there was a relative crisis in the early 1990s,[202] due to Lithuanian mistreatment of Polish minority, and Lithuanian suspicious that Poland would want to put Lithuania under its sphere of influence.[201] After a few years, as the situation normalized, Polish-Lithuanian relations have been steadily improving over the past two decades, with both countries joining the NATO and European Union.
Russia was one of the three partitioners of Poland, along with Austria and Prussia/Germany.
The joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland of 1939 started World War II.
In recent years, relations with Russia have worsened considerably. During the Russo-Georgian War Poland stated its support for Georgia and condemned Russia's actions. The Polish believed the war was carried out by the Russians in an attempt to reestablish and reassert its dominance over its former republics.
Since 2009, however, relations with Russia somewhat improved, despite the Smolensk air disaster where the former Polish president died on what is still considered a controversial event. After the annexation of Crimea by Russia the relations deteriorated again, as Poland strongly condemned Russian actions against Ukraine.
Poland and Sweden formed the Polish–Swedish union in the late 16th century.
Both countries share a border of about 529 kilometres (329 miles).[172] Poland's acceptance of the Schengen Agreement created problems with the Ukrainian border traffic. On July 1, 2009 an agreement on local border traffic between the two country's came into effect. This agreement enables Ukrainian citizens living in border regions to cross the Polish frontier according to a liberalized procedure.[213] The Orange Revolution in Ukraine evoked a wide and authentic support within the Polish society.[citation needed]
During the Cold War Poland retained a largely negative view of Britain as a sluggish ally of Poland during World War II, later acceptance of neglecting Poland in the international arena and placing it in communist influences. In communist times the UK was a part of the NATO block, so consequently it was considered by the communists as natural enemy of the communist bloc. British efforts meanwhile were focussed at trying to break Poland off from the Warsaw Pact and encouraging reforms in the country.
In the 1990s and 2000s democratic Poland has maintained close relations with Britain; both in defence matters and within the EU; Britain being one of only a few countries allowing equal rights to Polish workers upon their accession in 2004.[215]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 12 February 2019.[220]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 6 March 2012.[223]
 This article incorporates public domain material from World Factbook. CIA.


