27257,
ForeignrelationsofSanMarino,
San Marino is an independent and sovereign member of the international community. It maintains an extensive diplomatic network relative to its diminutive size, as well as an active foreign policy and international presence.
Among other international organizations, San Marino is a full member of the following international organizations:
It also cooperates with UNICEF and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and has official relations with the European Union.[1][2][3]
From May 10 until November 6, 1990, San Marino held the semi-annual presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. The second San Marino Chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe was from November 2006 until May 2007.
San Marino maintains diplomatic relations with 147 United Nations members, Holy See, Kosovo, and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, and furthermore maintains consular relations with Haiti and Iran.
On 31 March-1 April 2013, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon was the official orator on the occasion of the newly elected Captains Regent. “Although this country is small, your importance to the United Nations stands as tall as Mount Titano,” the Secretary-General told the country's highest officials, the two Captains Regent, in reference to the country's 739 meter UNESCO World Heritage Site. Mr. Ban also noted that the country accepted five times as many refugees as its population during the Second World War, and praised its emphasis on protecting human rights.[35] This has been the second visit to San Marino by a UN Secretary General, the first being Boutrous Boutrous-Gali's visit in 1996.
On 1 March 2023, the Grand and General Council of San Marino authorised the country's government to take sanctions against Russia for the invasion of Ukraine.
Russia has included San Marino in an Unfriendly List. 
United States was the first non-European state recognizing official diplomatic relations with San Marino.[40]



