23400,
ForeignrelationsofPanama,
Panama's foreign relations are conventional in outlook, with Panama being especially aligned with United States since the 1989 US invasion to topple the regime of General Manuel Noriega. The United States cooperates with the Panamanian government in promoting economic, political, security, and social development through U.S. and international agencies.
Panama has established diplomatic relations with following countries:[1][2]
Panama established a diplomatic relationship with the Qing dynasty in 1909. After the Xinhai Revolution, Panama recognized the establishment of the Republic of China (ROC), and has retained diplomatic ties with the ROC. In 2009, after President Ricardo Martinelli took office, Panama wished to switch diplomatic relations from the ROC to the People's Republic of China (PRC), but this was rejected by the PRC government based on violation of PRC's viewpoint on the One-China policy. Martinelli reaffirmed its commitment to Taiwan in the diplomatic arena, clearing doubts he could establish official ties with PRC; he also thanked the Taiwanese for cooperation and expressed the hope that cooperation and investments would intensify. 
"Panama reaffirms its determination to strengthen diplomatic ties with the Republic of China (Taiwan), as well as strengthening trade ties with the People's Republic of China (PRC)," said Foreign Minister Juan Carlos Varela, at a meeting in the Council of Taiwan Affairs.[14]
On June 12, 2017, President Juan Carlos Varela announced that Panama has established a diplomatic relationship with People's Republic of China, and Panama has severed diplomatic relationship with the Republic of China (Taiwan).
Panama is the first country in Central America where India established a resident embassy in 1973. Bilateral commercial and trade relations are steadily growing between India and Panama, with Panama seen as the gateway for expansion into Latin America.[15]
Panama officially recognised the independence of the Republic of Kosovo on 16 January 2009.[20] Kosovo and Panama established diplomatic relations on 27 August 2013, following the establishment of diplomatic relations Kosovo announced it would be opening an embassy in Panama and that this embassy would be Kosovo's 'gateway to Latin America'.[21]
Kosovo has an embassy in Panama City.[22] Both countries enjoy excellent relationships.
Panama was the first Latin American country on recognizing the SADR in 1978, during the military rule of Omar Torrijos.[27] Panama also has the oldest Sahrawi embassy in Latin America. Relations were suspended from 20 November 2013 to 7 January 2016;[28].
Both countries established diplomatic relations on Sep 30, 1962.
The United States cooperates with the Panamanian government in promoting economic, political, security, and social development through U.S. and international agencies. Cultural ties between the two countries are strong, and many Panamanians go to the United States for higher education and advanced training. In 2007, the U.S. and Panama partnered to launch a regional health worker training center. The center provides training to community healthcare workers in Panama and throughout Central America. About 25,000 American citizens reside in Panama, many retirees from the Panama Canal Commission and individuals who hold dual nationality. There is also a rapidly growing enclave of American retirees in the Chiriqui Province in western Panama.
Panama is a member of the UN General Assembly (and most major UN agencies) and has served three terms in the UN Security Council. In November 2006,  it was elected to serve a two-year term on the Security Council, beginning January 1, 2007.  It maintains membership in several international financial institutions, including the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
Panama is a member of the Organization of American States and was a founding member of the Rio Group. Although it was suspended from the Latin American Economic System — known informally both as the Group of Eight and the Rio Group — in 1988 due to its internal political system under Manuel Noriega, Panama was readmitted in September, 1994 as an acknowledgment of its present democratic credentials.
Panama is also one of the founding members of the Union of Banana Exporting Countries and belongs to the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. Panama is a member of the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN) as well as the Central American Integration System (SICA). Panama joined its six Central American neighbors at the 1994 Summit of the Americas in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA or CONCAUSA to promote sustainable economic development in the region.
Panama is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98).


