12066,
ForeignrelationsofGeorgia,

Georgia's location, nestled between the Black Sea, Russia, and Turkey, renders it strategically important. It is developing as the gateway from the Black Sea to the Caucasus and the larger Caspian region, but also serves as a buffer between Russia and Turkey. Georgia has a long and tumultuous relationship with Russia, but it is reaching out to its other neighbours and looking to the West in search of alternatives and opportunities. It signed a partnership and cooperation agreement with the European Union, participates in the Partnership for Peace, and encourages foreign investment. France, Germany, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States all have embassies in Tbilisi. Georgia in 2004-2008 sought to become a member of NATO, but did not succeed in the face of strong Russian opposition.[1]
Georgia is a member of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, and the OSCE.
Because of its strategic location, Georgia is in both the Russian and American spheres of influence,[2] however Georgia's relationship with Russia is at its lowest point since 1921 due to controversies regarding espionage and the Russo-Georgian War. As a result, Georgia broke off diplomatic relations with Russia and has left the Commonwealth of Independent States.[3]
Georgia maintains diplomatic relations with 186 UN member states, Holy See and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. The list below excludes Tanzania as no date is given.[4]
Nicaraguan-Georgian diplomatic relations established on 19 September 1994[46] and ended on 29 November 2008. The Georgian Foreign Ministry said that it had cut diplomatic ties with Nicaragua in a response to the latter's recognition of independence of breakaway South Ossetia and Abkhazia.[47]
On 9 January 2009, the U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Georgian Foreign Minister Grigol Vashadze signed a Charter on Strategic Partnership, a nonbinding document outlining areas of cooperation and reiterating the U.S. support for Georgia's territorial integrity and to Georgia's NATO membership.[49]
Georgia is represented in Timor by its embassy in Jakarta.[55]
Georgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relations with Japan
The establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of Korea and Georgia began on 14 December 1992.[66]
Georgia began the procedure of terminating diplomatic relations with Syria due to Damascus' recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 21 September 1992. 
On 29 August 2008, in the aftermath of the 2008 South Ossetia war, Deputy Foreign Minister Grigol Vashadze announced that Georgia had broken diplomatic relations with Russia. He also said that Russian diplomats must leave Georgia, and that no Georgian diplomat would remain in Russia, while only consular relations would be maintained. Russian foreign ministry spokesman Andrei Nesterenko said that Russia regretted this step.[104]
Relations between Georgia and Ukraine and between the Georgian and Ukrainian people in particular last from the Middle Ages.
Georgia has established relations with 185 countries and the Order of Malta. Georgia has terminated its diplomatic relations with Russia,[note 1][104] Nicaragua[note 1][47] and Syria.[note 1][71]
Georgia has not yet established diplomatic relations with:


