2897,
IndigenouspeoplesofArizona,
Indigenous peoples of Arizona are the Native American people of the state of Arizona. These include people that have lived in the region since time immemorial; tribes who entered the region centuries ago, such as the Southern Athabascan peoples; and the Pascua Yaqui who settled Arizona in mass in the early 20th century, though small communities had been in the region for hundreds of years prior. 
Arizona has the third largest Native American population of any U.S. state.[1]
Almost a quarter of Arizona is reservation land. The Navajo Nation has the largest reservation in the United States, and the Tohono O'odham Nation in southeast Arizona has the second-largest reservation.[1]
There are 17 federally recognized tribes completely within the borders of Arizona, and 5 more in Arizona whose territory spans multiple states. Of these, 20 tribes are members of the Inter-Tribal Council of Arizona (ITCA).[2]
Multiple states:
Several of the Colorado River tribes are headquartered across the state line in California but have historical connections to Arizona. These include the Chemehuevi, Cocopah (Xawitt Kwñchawaay), Quechan (Yuma), and Mojave (Hamakhava). Many of these are Yuman-speaking peoples.
Yuman language-speaking peoples connected to Arizona include the Havasupai (Havasuw `Baaja), Walapai, Yavapai, Mojave, Hualapai (Hwal `Baaja), Halchidhoma (Xalychidom), Quechan, Maricopa (Piipaash), and Cocopah.
Colorado River Numic language–speakers connected to Arizona include the Southern Paiute, Southern Ute and Chemehuevi.
The Navajo (Diné) and Apache are Southern Athabascan-speaking people who migrated into the American Southwest from the north, possibly around 1300 CE.[3] Apache bands connected to Arizona include the Dilzhe'e Apache, Chiricahua, San Carlos Apache (Nné, Coyotero, or Western Apache), White Mountain Apache
Oʼodham language–speakers include the Akimel O'odham (formerly Pima), Tohono O'odham, and Hia C-eḍ Oʼodham.
Pueblo peoples living in Arizona include the Hopi, Tewa, and Zuni (A:shiwi).
The Yaqui people speak a Uto-Aztecan language.


