22673,
Orimulsion,
Orimulsion is a registered trademark name for a bitumen-based fuel that was developed for industrial use by Intevep, the Research and Development Affiliate of Petroleos de Venezuela SA (PDVSA), following earlier collaboration on oil emulsions with BP.
Like coal and oil, bitumen occurs naturally and is obtained from the world's largest deposit in the Orinoco Belt in Venezuela. The deposit is estimated to be more than 1,300 billion barrels (190 billion m3) of bitumen, an amount approximately equivalent to the world's estimated proven oil reserves.[1][2][3]
Raw bitumen has an extremely high viscosity and specific gravity between 8 and 10 API gravity at ambient temperatures, making it unsuitable for direct use in conventional power stations. Orimulsion is produced by mixing the bitumen with approximately 30% fresh water and a small amount of surfactant. The resulting mixture behaves similarly to fuel oil. Recently, an alcohol-based surfactant has replaced the original phenol-based version, improving the transport properties of the fuel and eliminating the health concerns associated with the phenol group of surfactants.
As a fuel for electricity generation, Orimulsion has a number of attractive characteristics:[citation needed]
If a spill occurs during shipping over water, the Orimulsion mixture de-emulsifies, causing the bitumen to separate and no longer remain in suspension.
Orimulsion is classified as a non-Newtonian fluid, and if its temperature drops below 30 °C, it undergoes a process referred to as 'setting'[further explanation needed]. Once set, it becomes extremely difficult to pump, and restarting operations or restoring the flow through the pipeline becomes impossible.
Orimulsion is currently used as a commercial boiler fuel in power plants worldwide, including countries such as Japan, Italy[4] and China. Its usage was previously more widespread, and there was an increasing demand for it. However, following the Venezuelan general strike of 2002–03, many engineers from PDVSA were dismissed. Since Orimulsion had been highly regarded by these engineers, it lost favor among key political leaders.[dubious  – discuss] Consequently, the Venezuelan government has been attempting to gradually phase out the Orimulsion program, except for its sales to China. The Venezuelan government maintains close ties with China, similar to its relationship with Cuba. As a result, China continues to receive supplies of Orimulsion, while the rest of the world either had their supply terminated or is still in the process of winding down. Despite these developments, Orimulsion still holds great potential for domestic consumption.[citation needed]
Another reason given by current PDVSA management is that with rising crude oil prices, it has been found that mixing or diluting Orinoco bitumen (extra-heavy oil) with a lighter crude oil can make this blend more profitable as a crude oil on the world market than by selling it as Orimulsion. An example of this is the popular Merey blend (Orinoco bitumen and Mesa crude oil). ConocoPhillips along with PDVSA operate the Merey Sweeny 58,000-barrel-per-day (9,200 m3/d) (bpd) delayed coker, vacuum tower and related facilities at ConocoPhillips' refinery in Sweeny, Texas, U.S.A. for  processing and upgrading heavy sour Merey crude oil.[citation needed]
Air pollutant control technology that is commonly available can limit emissions from Orimulsion to levels considered "Best Available Control Technology", as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.[5]


