23873,
PatCadigan,

Patricia Oren Kearney Cadigan (born September 10, 1953) is a British-American science fiction author, whose work is most often identified with the cyberpunk movement. Her novels and short stories often explore the relationship between the human mind and technology. Her debut novel, Mindplayers, was nominated for the Philip K. Dick Award in 1988.[1]
Cadigan was born in Schenectady, New York, and grew up in Fitchburg, Massachusetts. 
In the 1960s Cadigan and a childhood friend "invented a whole secret life in which we were twins from the planet Venus", she told National Public Radio.[2] The Beatles "came to us for advice about their songs and how to deal with fame and other important matters," Cadigan says. "On occasion, they would ask us to use our highly developed shape-shifting ability to become them, and finish recording sessions and concert tours when they were too tired to go on themselves." The Venusian twins had other superpowers, that they would sometimes use to help out Superman, Wonder Woman and other heroes, she said.[2]
Cadigan was educated in theater at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and studied science fiction and science fiction writing at the University of Kansas (KU) under science fiction author and editor James Gunn.[3]
Cadigan met her first husband, Rufus Cadigan, while in college; they divorced shortly after she graduated from KU in 1975. That same year, Cadigan joined the convention committee for MidAmeriCon, the 34th World Science Fiction Convention being held in Kansas City, Missouri, over the 1976 Labor Day weekend; she served on the committee as the convention's guest liaison to writer guest of honor Robert A. Heinlein, as well as helped to develop programming for the convention. At the same time, she also worked for fantasy writer Tom Reamy at his Nickelodeon Graphics Arts Service studio, where she daily typset various jobs. She also prepared the type galleys for MidAmeriCon's various publications, including the convention's hardcover program book. Following Reamy's death on 4 November, 1977, Cadigan went to work as a writer for Kansas City, MO's Hallmark Cards company. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, she also edited the small press fantasy and science fiction magazines Chacal and later Shayol with her second husband, Arnie Fenner.[citation needed]
Cadigan emigrated to London in 1996, where she is married to her third husband, Christopher Fowler (not to be confused with the author of the same name). She became a UK citizen in late 2014.[4]
Cadigan sold her first professional science fiction story in 1980. Her success as an author encouraged her to become a full-time writer in 1987.
Cadigan's first novel, Mindplayers, introduces what becomes the common theme to all her works: her stories blur the line between reality and perception by making the human mind a real, explorable place. Her second novel, Synners, expands upon the same theme; both feature a future where direct access to the mind via technology is possible. While her stories include many of the gritty, unvarnished characteristics of the cyberpunk genre, she further specializes in this exploration of the speculative relationship between technology and the perceptions of the human mind.[5][citation needed]
Cadigan has won a number of awards, including the 2013 Hugo Award for "The Girl-Thing Who Went Out for Sushi" in the Best Novelette category, and the Arthur C. Clarke Award in 1992 and 1995 for her novels Synners and Fools.[6]
Robert A. Heinlein dedicated his 1982 novel Friday in part to Cadigan following her being the guest liaison to him at the 34th Worldcon in Kansas City.[7]In 2013, Cadigan announced that she had been diagnosed with cancer.[8] She underwent surgery after an early diagnosis, suffered a relapse some years after, and recovered after extensive chemotherapy.[9]
From the Internet Speculative Fiction Database.[10]
Patterns, (Ursus Sep. 1989)
Home By the Sea, (WSFA Press May 1992)
Dirty Work, (Mark V. Ziesing Sep. 1993)



Information box
{'Born': 'September 10, 1953 (age 69)\nSchenectady, New York', 'Occupation': 'Writer', 'Language': 'English', 'Nationality': 'American\nBritish (as of 2014)[citation needed]', 'Alma mater': 'University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of Kansas', 'Genre': 'Science fiction, cyberpunk', 'Notable works': 'Synners, Fools', 'Notable awards': 'Arthur C. Clarke Award\n1992 Synners\nArthur C. Clarke Award\n1995 Fools\nHugo Award for Best Novelette\n2013 The Girl-Thing who Went Out for Sushi'}