11854,
Patentnonsense,
1
I really know what is meant, but due to nonsense patents being around so much I always get it wrong at first each single encounter of the term ... Are there others with the same sentiment? -- Tomdo08 (talk) 14:25, 24 October 2010 (UTC)Reply[reply]
The WP:PATENT short-cut links here. I want to put a hatnote on this page to disambiguate with patent (legal) meaning help i.e. link to the essay Wikipedia:Reliable_source_examples#Are_patents_reliable_sources.3F . Any objections? Widefox; talk 13:04, 18 October 2012 (UTC)Reply[reply]
The way that this page is currently written excludes instructions on what to do if a user adds patent nonsense to an existing article.  I would think that in such cases the user should be warned with the uw-test series of templates and that such instances should be reverted (undone or rolled back).  Could someone add this to this guideline with easy to read and understand language?  I'm not as good at wording things like this as I thought I was based on my experiences attempting to modify wordings on other guidelines.  Thanks. Technical 13 (talk) 14:09, 7 June 2013 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Something rather confusing about this project page is that brilliant prose is linked to Featured article. First of all, "brilliant prose" is made to sound like a popularly used phrase to describe good articles. Second of all, are "brilliant prose"s only featured articles? Anyway I find this nomenclature weird and the Wikilinking even more baffling. The Average Wikipedian (talk) 13:28, 3 May 2015 (UTC)Reply[reply]
In the section "Dealing with patent nonsense", the first bulleted item is "Replace it with a well-written article." with the "well-written article" linking to WP:Featured articles.  I don't think anyone is going to replace a patent nonsense article with a featured article (not off the bat, anyway) and would like to request that the link either be removed or (better) replaced with a link to WP:How to write a great article.  This seems more in keeping with dealing with patent nonsense and encouraging editors to replace it with non-nonsense.  KDS4444 (talk) 01:55, 4 September 2017 (UTC)Reply[reply]
How could anyone confuse copyright violations, plagiarism, defamation, or underlinked content with patent nonsense? They do not resemble patent nonsense. If we are going to list everything that is not patent nonsense—as opposed to problems that one might plausibly confuse with patent nonsense—this section should grow to approximately the size of Wikipedia. In my opinion, we should remove these items because they detract from the guideline.—Finell 21:44, 2 March 2019 (UTC)Reply[reply]
cos as presently positioned, at the top, it must be unnecessarily baffling.  - SquisherDa (talk) 14:11, 30 September 2019 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Is this really a guideline? I feel like this is already covered by WP:G1 for entire articles, and Wikipedia:Vandalism / Wikipedia:Disruptive editing for individual edits. "Demoting" would decrease WP:CREEP, but I feel like there is something I am missing here. Thoughts / comments / reasons why this is a WP:BADIDEA? HouseBlastertalk 02:44, 28 August 2022 (UTC)Reply[reply]
The following discussion is closed. Please do not modify it. Subsequent comments should be made on the appropriate discussion page. No further edits should be made to this discussion.

Should Wikipedia:Patent nonsense page be "demoted" from a guideline to an information page? HouseBlastertalk 02:29, 12 September 2022 (UTC)Reply[reply]


