24913,
Playdia,
The Playdia (プレイディア, Pureidia) (developed under the codename "BA-X"[2]) is a fifth-generation home video game console released exclusively in Japan in 1994[3] at the initial price of ¥24,800.[4] It was intended for a young audience and, like many consoles of the era (e.g. the LaserActive and the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer), was marketed more as a multimedia home entertainment system than as a dedicated gaming console,[5] with anime quiz software and edutainment making up most of the game library.  The Playdia uses a single infrared joypad with simple controls. Bandai, the Playdia's manufacturer, was the only software publisher to support this console (except for VAP who published Ie Naki Ko - Suzu no Sentaku instead of Bandai).
The Playdia was equipped with a CD-ROM drive, and the software was supplied on CD-ROM. The controller used two AAA batteries with a wireless method using infrared rays that could be stored in the main unit when not in use. The target age group was set mainly for elementary school students as both the hardware and software were inexpensive for home games at the time.[6]

The Playdia could create stunning anime-style Full Motion Video using CD-based games (FMV). The majority of the games were interactive learning experiences. However, Bandai did create a few video games with an interactive component based on their franchise series, including Gundam, Sailor Moon, Ultra Man, and Dragon Ball Z. The games, however, lacked true game action.[6]As a simple interactive cartoon, the player just directs the on-screen figure by choosing from the menu options that are presented to them on the Playdia control pad. In addition, Playdia was the only 8-bit fifth-generation game machine, because the products of the competitors at that time were equipped with 32-bit CPUs and 64-bit CPUs across the board. The system had to rely on Bandai’s IPs which started to be redundant.  

On the main body and software package, there is a logo of "QIS" and the notation "This software is dedicated to the QIS standard".[7] QIS is an abbreviation of " Quick Interactive System" and indicates a high-speed access function to CD-ROM. There is no BIOS or menu when the user starts the console without a disc, all that shows is a blue screen.[6]
The Playdia had very poor sales, therefore for Bandai, the console was a failure. Bandai discontinued the console in 1996[6] and the unsold consoles were converted by Banpresto, a Bandai subsidiary, into coin-operated Micha King machines that played anime clips in Japanese arcades and shops. It successor was the unsuccessful Apple Pippin that Bandai co-developed.



Information box
{'Manufacturer': 'Bandai', 'Type': 'Home video game console', 'Generation': 'Fifth generation', 'Lifespan': 'JP: September 23, 1994[1]', 'Media': 'CD-ROM', 'CPU': '8-bit NEC μPD78214GC @12MHz; 8-bit Toshiba TMP87C800F @8MHz (Z80 derivative)', 'Graphics': 'Asahi Kasei AK8000', 'Sound': 'Asahi Kasei AK8000', 'Controller input': 'Infrared Joypad', 'Predecessor': 'Bandai RX-78\nTerebikko', 'Successor': 'Apple Bandai Pippin'}