36525,
Preferences,

Preferences are the seventy or so user options for browsing, editing, searching, notifications, and more. A link to your Preferences page is available at the top of every Wikipedia page when you have an account, alongside links to your other account services such as your Contributions. Another way to get there is by navigating to the Special:Preferences page. 
Once at your Preferences page, you can control much of the Wikipedia user interface through the many feature settings provided by MediaWiki (the software of Wikipedia): skins, plug-ins, date formats, a signature, and more. For example, you can select to be prompted to enter an edit summary if you forget to. The Preferences page also presents a link to customize your CSS to adjust your page style details.
Plus, there are hundreds of user tools to explore, many listed at Wikipedia:Tools § Browsing and editing, that can override or tweak preferences provided by MediaWiki. Each account has its own Custom JavaScript page where the tools install themselves, and where you can help develop them.
At their site, MediaWiki maintains a browser compatibility matrix. The time you spend in getting an account, setting your preferences, finding tools and testing your browser (before you ever lose an edit) will pay off. 
Feature requests can be made, and bugs reported, as described at Wikipedia:Phabricator. The current set of preferences are largely the result of issues raised by newcomers at places such as the Village pump, and driven by regulars who hold long discussions and collectively drive issues.
The Preferences page is accessible when you are logged-in, but you must have JavaScript enabled in your browser, since the page and all its tabs are an extensive JavaScript application.
You do not need to click Save on every tab on the Preferences page, as the Save button affects all changes on all Preferences tabs.[1] You can go from tab to tab setting all your preferences before saving, because Save remembers your changes on the other tabs. To forget unsaved changes, simply leave the page without saving. If you wish to undo your saved changes, you will need to reset them manually.  
Clicking Restore all default settings will harmlessly load another page, which will then offer the button to reset all preferences in every tab to their default values. This includes a few items that are stored as a preference, but that aren't directly editable in Special:Preferences. If you do reset your preferences, you can restore your custom signature from the wikitext of a history page, update your custom CSS or JavaScript from Wikipedia:Tools § Browsing and editing, and then re-select and save your preferences.
The default settings are aimed at newcomers editing articles. Intermediate editors tend to activate more features, such as "warn me if I forgot an edit summary", and advanced editors and administrators use the special settings, gadgets, and editors for their tasks.
You have the same username and password on sister projects such as Wiktionary, at MediaWiki.org itself, and on the Wikipedia of other languages. Each of your account's preferences are independent because each wiki is a website, with their own administration (namespaces, settings, accounts, etc.). Even the word "Preferences" on the top may be set differently! On the Simple English Wikipedia, it says "My settings".
Change the web browser experience.
Concerning the edit page, its initiation, and look and feel, Wikipedia offers a high number of options. Some of them are:
The font size for the edit box can be set in Wikipedia editing preferences or in the browser. In Firefox, there are two font-size settings at Options → Content → "Default font" Advanced…, one for the edit box, and one for the rest of the page. If you just want uniformity, check to see if it allows Wikipedia to choose its own font; then you set Wikipedia's "Edit Area Font Style" to "Serif" or "Sans Serif", and the font size in the edit box will match the rest of the page.
The number of rows in the edit box is no longer set in preferences. For a temporary change, when the edit box is displayed, drag up or down the small square in the bottom right corner of the edit box. Alternatively, make the change stick by adding this line to your CSS file (in Preferences, Appearance), usually Special:MyPage/common.css:
where 25em is an example (and typical), height.
Two editing toolbars are offered that will span the top of the edit box. (Wikipedia:Reftoolbar shows versions.)
To use more of your favorite text editor instead of just the edit box and toolbars, see Wikipedia:Text editor support. Also see the Gadgets tab.
Recent changes refer to changes of pages in the database. Every time a wiki page is edited, and changes were actually made, a record is kept of the difference. For example, a page history shows the revisions for that particular page. But recent changes can report on more than just the revisions of a page, or an entire wiki, they can also report on the recent changes of an editor (their contributions). The user preferences for recent changes are the style in which these lists of revisions will appear:
The watchlist has even more finely tuned preferences, because like the edit window, it is often a core tool for editors. 
More information about these various histories can be found at the following places. For global changes to Wikipedia pages, see Help:Recent changes. For user contributions, see Help:User contributions. For page histories, see Help:Page history. For other types of logs see Help:Log.
These settings are for advanced editors who have a detailed understanding of the five pillars and of the templates used to mark judgments on the page. Pending changes refers to the style of the presentation of
For an example of a page history showing the pending changes feature, click on the history of a page listed at Special:PendingChanges.
The watchlist options include which pages, and what "recent" means to you. If your Preferences has "Email me when a page or file on my watchlist is changed" set (at the bottom of the "User profile" tab), then only by visiting a page will you actually set its email notification flag. Once you miss the email for a particular page change or don't visit the page (or ignore the email), you will not receive any more emails for that page. You can still dutifully monitor that page by its watchlist edit-summaries, but its particular email notification flag will remain unset until you visit it. This facilitates monitoring a large watchlist while preventing potentially useless emails to you.
In case you want to set all email notifications anyway, you can at any time mark all pages "visited". If your Preferences → Gadgets has "Display pages on your watchlist that have changed since your last visit in bold", then your watchlist will have a button labeled "Mark all pages visited". That button will effectively set all of your email notification flags.
These settings alter the Special:Notifications tool. The options for Notifications were first added in May 2013. See Wikipedia Signpost topic "English-language Wikipedia to be first to receive Echo deployment" for a brief overview.
For a full explanation of the specific preferences, see Wikipedia:Notifications § Preferences and settings.
You can enable (or disable) individual types of notifications by checking (or unchecking) the boxes next to it. You can enable (or disable) notifications on the web or by email for most notification types (note that some notifications cannot be disabled, such as changes to your user rights or new talk page messages: these notifications are too important to be dismissed).
Wikipedia:Notifications § Types of notifications has a general list of the types of notifications. Special:DisplayNotificationsConfiguration lists all notification types available and how they are configured.
You can mute on-site notifications from individual users by enter their username into the box. You will still receive notifications if a muted user writes on your user talk page or reviews a page you have created. The muted user will still receive a successful mention notification, if they've enabled that preference.
You can mute "page linked" notifications for specific pages by typing each page's name into the box.
Gadgets are the software contributed by users, not the software that runs Wikipedia, and so you'll see the group names Editing and Appearance are the same as the tab names on the preferences page. If you see tabs on the preferences page your web-browsers already has JavaScript enabled. The gadgets go through an authoritative process before they appear on the list. There are gadgets for, browsing, editing, appearance and for compatibility. A general overview of the select gadgetry available there is as follows.
See much more customization available in the pages in the See also section, such as a search and replace dialog that understands JavaScript regular expressions.
Beta Features is a way for users to test new features on Wikipedia and other Wikimedia sites before they are released for everyone.
The MediaWiki preferences page offers a set of options for the generic user. If you discover a special role on Wikipedia, there is probably a powerful tool for it at Wikipedia:Tools § Browsing and editing.
Operating an account with a tool may carry side effects, such as popups, toolbars and frame objects on your browsing or editing page space that are sometimes burdensome, yet sometimes powerfully necessary. Rather than uninstalling, it is possible to just switch skins, because there are four skins, each with a pair of customizations. 1) Custom JavaScript has the tools. 2) Custom CSS can carry over your preferred fonts, colors, and frame borders to each skin, no matter what tools that skin may also be loaded with.


