33008,
Repliestocommonobjections,
How do people react to Wikipedia?
Some people react strongly. Some are nearly instantly hooked, and love the idea; others think the idea is so absurd as not to require any serious consideration. We try to answer a number of common criticisms of the Wikipedia project on this page. (See also WP:Criticisms for exact quotations of prominent critics.)
"I can't imagine having my golden prose edited by any passer-by. It's mine, so why would I let others touch it?"
"I thought I understood Gödel's incompleteness theorems pretty well, and since the then-existing article was short and incomplete, I decided to rewrite it. Since then, several people have chipped in, sometimes rewriting a paragraph, sometimes criticizing an omission, sometimes deleting parts. I didn't agree with all changes, but with most of them. No material is ever lost since Wikipedia stores all previous versions of all articles. So I reverted a few changes back. Overall, the article is now much better than I could ever have written alone."
"Wikipedia will be ruined by cranks who post ridiculous theories on the Internet."
Some websites say the first moon landing was staged in a movie studio, or describe supposed perpetual motion machines. It is impossible to correct those websites, no matter how wrong they are, because their authors demand complete control over their work. They fail miserably on Wikipedia.
"Some persistent cranks could write up a crankish page on the Holocaust, and keep reverting it back to their version."
Generally, partisans of all sorts are kept under control. Wikipedians feel pretty strongly about enforcing our non-bias policy. We've managed to work our way to rough consensus on a number of controversial issues. People who stubbornly insist that an article must reflect their personal biases are rare, and then they generally receive a drubbing.
"Wikipedia will end up like Usenet (newsgroups) – just a bunch of flame wars."
Discussion on talk pages centres on article improvement, rather than merits of various competing views. We have an informal but widely respected policy against using talk pages for partisan wrangling independent of article improvement; i.e. we're not going to discuss if the death sentence is a good thing or not and if it should be abolished or not, because the primary purpose of Wikipedia is creating an encyclopedia. Rather, we try to achieve consensus about how to present each viewpoint (of prominent advocates for and against the death penalty) fairly and in proportion.
Usenet lacks abilities absolutely essential to Wikipedia's success: We edit other people's work. We do this all the time on Wikipedia, which encourages creative and collegial collaboration. Or more strongly, on Wikipedia there's no such thing as "other people's work", because no one owns the information. This results in enforcement of community-agreed-upon standards, which is very difficult to achieve in Usenet.
Usenet users pioneered the "FAQ" as a stable document to give answers to questions that had already been thoroughly discussed. These documents, although secondary to the discussion forum, are a useful source of information.  Wikipedia in effect turns this process on its head:  The article (analogous to the FAQ) is now the focus of the activity, and the discussion is secondary.
Furthermore, Usenet is a debate forum. Wikipedia is, very self-consciously, an encyclopedia project! This provides some agreement on what Wikipedia is not.
The Wiki way focuses on agreement, not disagreement as weblogs, mailing lists, and Usenet often do. There is room for almost anyone to work on Wikipedia, without encountering those who have a truly incompatible view.
"Many ignorant people who think they know stuff will riddle articles with errors and serious omissions."
Ideally, amateurs will recognize when they're dealing with an expert, and start contributing differently – by asking questions, saying which bits of an article are unclear, and doing some research "grunt work". Wikipedia benefits from having amateurs and experts work together. Think of the great way "Amateurs" or newcomers to writing can learn how to be better at the skill.
"Professionals" can and do come in to correct errors later. But we must create a framework, terminology and conventions that make sense to amateurs. By making it easy for amateurs, we increase the amount of content, and enable easy achievement of critical mass. Conversely, we must create a framework and conventions that allow professionals to contribute without being frustrated by having to repeatedly correct errors introduced by tenacious but ill-informed amateurs. Admittedly, Wikipedia could do better at this. However, by building a decent text base that can then have its kinks ironed out by serious scholars, and by providing an interface and update protocol tolerable and respectful enough for people to use, we make stone soup.
Also, it's much more time-efficient for an amateur to write an article because the corrections by a professional will usually be minor. In any field, professionals are few compared to amateurs and are generally busy. Therefore, an extensive collection of knowledge is much better off with amateur contributions, as long as readers recognize this, and have a way to discern an article's history. Whether readers truly recognize this is not clear.
"What if an article never gets corrected and over time, just gets worse?"
"There are plenty of partisans who are all too eager to leave out information that is important to presenting a balanced view.  They'll be delighted to post to Wikipedia, and that's going to create huge gaps in your coverage, which will ruin the project."
"What about advertisers?  Will those with a product or service to hawk see the opportunity to hit a targeted market and write new articles for their product or worse, edit the article that corresponds to their generic product class (e.g., computer) to an ad for their product?"
Corporate advertisers would likely not find Wikipedia to be an attractive advertising medium.  In traditional web-based advertising, such as banner ads, popup ads, and email advertising, the response rate can be directly measured, either through web bugs or server logs.  If a company used Wikipedia to peddle its goods, the response rate could not be measured.
Not being able to measure results may not stop individuals who want to advertise their new multi-level marketing scheme, but unless they're using a bot (see next section), it takes a lot of time and energy to keep reverting the page back to the advertisement, so that the would-be spammer would get their message viewed (in an uneditable form!) more often and more reliably by using a traditional advertising medium.
Ironically, advertising spam can actually be beneficial to Wikipedia.  Suppose an advertiser for body building products edited that page to an ad for its product.  A reader who happens by and sees the spam could copy the advertisement, revert the page to its previous state, and then add information discussing the advertiser's specific methods or claims to the wealth of knowledge on the subject.  In effect, advertisers' claims, when tempered and weighed against other knowledge associated with the subject, can yield a more robust article than before.
"You still haven't addressed the real bane of Usenet: massive automated spamming. It would be trivial to write a script to post weight-loss ads to all Wikipedia pages, and once spammers or vandals start to use wikibots, you're sitting ducks."
Wikipedia also uses wikibots for good purposes.  Bots run by Wikipedia volunteers detect and revert spam.  These bots must be approved and are then supervised by contributors.
Wikipedia also has the ability to install CAPTCHA and other spam-blocking methods if the need exists.
"What do you do if people start running scripts to repost their own bit of vandalism or spam, and from different locations so you can't just block their IP address?"
"Wikipedia coverage is heavily biased by the sorts of people who want to contribute to it."
The English Wikipedia's largest bias is in favour of Western topics, and particularly topics relevant to English-speaking nations such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and so on. People will probably always prefer to write about familiar subjects, but it doesn't mean there isn't considerable and constantly increasing depth to the coverage of many other areas of the world too. As foreign-language Wikipedias gain depth, some of their articles are translated into English for en.Wikipedia, which can help to mitigate this bias.  Also, many of our early contributors were 'nerds' of various descriptions — hackers, scientists/academics and so on — and, as such, our science and technology coverage was initially far deeper and broader than our arts and humanities coverage.  That may still be true to some extent, but it is becoming less and less clear cut.  Sue Gardner and her staff at Wikimedia stated in 2010 that one of their priorities is to increase diversity among Wikipedia contributors.
Also, while the percentages of people working on less popular topics might remain low, the absolute numbers of such people have increased since the early years of Wikipedia, growing the content in those areas. Because Wikipedia doesn't have a time limit, it's more important that each area eventually get the coverage it deserves, than that it be balanced. Even if the computer and mathematics areas, for example, grow faster than the dance and literature areas, we hope and believe the latter topics will gradually receive increased and deepening coverage.  For example, in 2006, no operas or operettas were featured articles.  By 2009, there were over a dozen opera- and Savoy opera-related featured articles.
Another solution we actively engage in is to target the weak areas by recruiting contributors for those areas in various ways, for example by using Wikiprojects and edit-a-thons.  More and more people are becoming aware of Wikipedia.  See Wikipedia Statistics
"What if somebody tries to delete a section of an article, or add a couple of words to alter its meaning? Does Wikipedia back up its articles? Does Wikipedia scrutinize its articles for even the smallest changes made to less popular articles? Also, does all this mean the content of articles is subject to constant changes in meaning and detail, and that an article will be completely different over time?"
So-called sneaky vandalism, where a few words are inserted in a way intended to change the meaning without being noticed, is rarely effective, because we do not scrutinize articles for changes manually – instead we rely on software features which plainly mark for our review the differences between two versions of an article. Our technology, together with certain telltale signs learned from experience, makes such vandalism easy to detect.  We also employ technological methods to detect and remove vandalism.
It is true that articles change over time, eventually into what may seem to be an entirely new article. This is by design – a brief look at an older paper encyclopedia will show you that, even when the subject is historical, what we know about the subject and our attitude toward it is a rapidly moving target. This problem is exacerbated with modern topics like software and current events. By allowing gradual changes to be made over time, we continuously adapt to new information and new perspectives in a way static encyclopedias cannot.
Various forms of provenance have been proposed for Wikipedia (see Wikipedia:Provenance).  Such proposals are quite controversial (see Wikipedia talk:Provenance).  However, providing provenance could help address many of the issues discussed below. The stable versions and flagged revisions proposals are to introduce an anti-wiki concept of fixed versions that have been vetted to be high quality.
"A giant 'under construction' sign should be on almost every article."
Equally, we have articles that are stubs, are inaccurate, are biased, are poorly written or proofread, or are just plain rubbish.  That comes with our ambitious goals and the way we work. And on many of these articles, such as stubs, we do actually have under construction signs!  Our system is to gradually improve articles that are incomplete or need editing.
"Wikipedia lacks upstanding intellectuals and highly qualified contributors.  After all, Wikipedia will take anything from anybody!"
Experts often write for an audience of other experts, whereas Wikipedia is read by the general public – people who are unfamiliar with a subject and want a quick introduction to that subject, not an expert treatment.  Since students are familiar with problems they are themselves encountering while learning about a given subject, they are more adept at drafting treatments of that subject suitable for the general public.
Still, plenty of "intellectuals" participate in Wikipedia. Our mathematics section, for example, benefits greatly from the dedication of several mathematicians who are very active on Wikipedia; our string theory articles have recently been expanded by a Harvard physics professor. (Who knows, maybe Stephen Hawking was a Wikipedia contributor too!)
"Why would highly qualified people get involved with Wikipedia? Why should any researcher care about it, since it's not a serious reference work?"
Wikipedia provides free, unlimited server space and well-designed page construction tools for anyone doing something that fits within the Wikipedia mission and doesn't care about owning the information: a description that matches the archetypal academic researcher. Academics generally get their jobs because they like learning and/or teaching others. We do both here.
It can be fun for intellectually serious people if we know we're creating something of quality. It's part of the volunteer ethic – the joy of helping others. And, as explained above, many people believe we are creating something of quality here.
"I looked at an area I know something about, and found all sorts of errors and omissions. I was surprised and amused. I don't want to be associated with something of this low quality."
We, too, deplore bad work: we just go ahead and fix the problems we see.  It would be great if you would help us by doing the same. We also think there's much on Wikipedia we can be proud of, so look at the best bits of Wikipedia, as well as the worst.
If the main thing that's stopping you at this point is that some articles in one area of Wikipedia are of substandard quality, we'd ask you to come back next year, or the year after. See if the mistakes in those articles haven't been corrected, and a lot more details supplied. Soon enough, we're sure the project will be something you want to be associated with.
"Currently Wikipedia is stupid. I looked up a topic I know something about and found a few words. That's ridiculous!"
There are many "stub" entries, and we share your opinion of their ridiculousness. Yet mighty articles can grow from little stubs. Remember, all articles need to start somewhere!  As people find or fix stubs, Wikipedia improves. Equally, stubs are created on subjects where we used to have no article at all! Stubs are a consequence of Wikipedia's "continual improvement", and we're not ashamed of that.
"It seems Britannica has extremely high standards for what they put into their publications, both online and offline. Wikipedia has no such standards, so it's bound to be low quality."
"When it is good, Britannica is so partly because it is authoritative, by being selective. Wikipedia isn't selective about its authors; hence it will never be authoritative."
"Good quality requires peer review and expertise. Why should we care about articles written by an arbitrary group of people whose knowledge and ability could range from expertise to hopeless ignorance? Ignorance mixed with knowledge does not benefit knowledge."
Second, there is a problem with the concept of peer review in general.  Many great advances in the social and natural sciences have come by challenging the status quo and, because of that, their contributions were ignored or belittled by their peers. For example, George Akerlof, Nobel Laureate in Economics in 2001, had his classic paper (for which he won the Nobel Prize) entitled "The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism" rejected by the American Economic Review for being trivial and by the Journal of Political Economy because it conflicted with economic theory. Only after submitting it to a third journal, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, did the breakthrough article become published. Wikipedia allows for discourse where other venues would not.
"Look, all this speculation and 'experimentation' is fine and well, but if there's one thing I've learned in my studies, it's that you must know something about the author and his/her qualifications to speak on the topic – or at least be provided with appropriate references to support his/her claims in order to evaluate the validity of a nonfiction work."
In fact, many of the well-developed articles seem to have more diverse and numerous references than most traditional encyclopedias. Do you recall ever seeing a Britannica or Encarta article with hundreds of footnotes in it?
Second, as the number of participants increase, so does the number of experts bringing weak articles up to par – while you may be unaware of which experts worked on an article, if you know an article existed for many months and some experts in that topic contribute, it's fairly likely those experts have already reviewed the article. In other words, knowledge of the process, and of the fact that it includes experts in many fields, may be better than knowing a particular (alleged) expert has written a particular article. Perhaps the relevant question is: "How expert is the Wikipedia contributor community?" The answer is, "We have experts in many different fields, and new highly qualified people arrive all the time." All we require is a few experts continuously "raising the bar" from the beginning of the project. It is quite all right if very many or even most experts fail to help, or think poorly of us.
A traditional encyclopedia might hire a specialist on the topic to write an article. But we have a large number of those specialists volunteering their time here, as well as specialists from other fields – doctors, engineers, soldiers, political activists, cooks, comic book fiends, etc. ... this means you get a much wider range of perspectives, and thus a more complete understanding of the topic.
"Indeed, then, I should like to see some means of peer review before edits are accepted on articles which have already been approved by some similar process of peer review. At the moment it is entirely in the hands of an individual whether he thinks a modification he intends is an improvement, so there comes a point when a modification is as likely to damage the resource. If some system could be installed, then you would protect against crank attacks as well as misjudgment, and ensure a continually improving resource."
That said, perhaps someone who has the above suggestion will be pleased by the approval system mentioned above and which can be found discussed at meta:Article validation, and Wikipedia:Flagged revisions.  Such a system would identify a body of experts who would put their official stamp of approval on some articles.  Those articles could still be just as easily revised as they were before, but there would also be a version presented as the "approved" version.  This way we can "freeze" high-quality content without freezing the process.
"One great source – if you can trust it." [1]
A simple editable webpage on the Internet would indeed be subjected to recklessness. The difference provided in Wikipedia is the infrastructure that helps direct those raw public contributions to the level of standard required.
Criticism of the reliability of Wikipedia tends to highlight isolated examples, and among 6,680,158 articles such examples are likely to exist just from the size of this number alone. On the other hand, the few comparative studies which have been done so far have found the average factual accuracy of Wikipedia to be similar or sometimes even higher than that of traditional encyclopedias.
There are varying levels of quality and trustworthiness for each article that needs to be discerned carefully. Featured articles in Wikipedia are the ones most likely to be a collection of trustworthy articles and the number will grow in time. There are also efforts to create a version 1.0 of Wikipedia and to add a software feature which will allow specific versions of an article to be flagged as trustworthy.
Wikipedia may also delegate trust to other sources by referencing.
Due to occasional vandalism, incompetency and lack of effort, articles and professional encyclopedias alike should always be taken with a grain of salt. When one researches on a topic, he or she would reference many sources rather than rely only on one as good practice.
Note that the leading competing online encyclopedias have disclaimers and provide no warranty as to their accuracy – Britannica and Bartleby (note: Encarta is now defunct) (see Wikipedia:Non-Wikipedia disclaimers, which also includes examples from reputed news organisations). Sometimes the staff of those encyclopedias seem to forget about the disclaimers.
"Wikipedia cannot be trusted, unlike other more scholarly sources."
"Many of your replies seem to assume quality will improve as the website grows, but quantity doesn't always beget quality. Perhaps it will get worse as it gets bigger?"
First, the more eyes that see our articles, the more transparent the errors will be (over the long haul).  While we might have one or two philosophers on board during one month, a year later we might have ten or twenty – and then mistakes in their work will be caught much more quickly.
"You may have grown fast in the past, but it's surely wrong to suppose the growth rate in the past is a good indication of what will happen in the future."
Along with adding new articles, many older articles are also merged or deleted because they no longer pass the tests for quality. Because the deletion reviews require time to process, the number of deletions later offsets some new additions. Also, many high-quality articles (noted at WP:Featured articles) have been downgraded, due to higher standards or numerous problems introduced in later edits. So, growth is not a simple increase, but rather also offset by the ongoing reductions.
It is possible, even likely, Wikipedia will eventually become a starting place for researchers in its own right, whether to look up quick facts or subject overviews, or to examine the high-quality sources in our references lists.  When search engines first hit the Internet, they had to gain in popularity and were simply linked from other pages, but, after achieving critical mass, they were then viewed as an authority in their own right and were made the first place someone looked, not in addition to a particular viewer's current favorite choice.
There is some attrition (some old contributors don't write so much anymore), but this is offset by an overall increase in the active population. There are many more active Wikipedians now than there were years ago.[needs update]
Another part of the argument is that the overall quality of Wikipedia has been increasing, and this in turn increases the number of people likely to take notice of the project, link to it, use its contents (properly sourcing Wikipedia), etc.
The number of potential encyclopedia topics is not infinite, but it is very large, much larger than the 6,680,158 articles we already have.  Even if we reach a point at which we cannot grow significantly in breadth, we will still be able to grow significantly in depth.
"You say Wikipedia is growing rapidly.  Suppose it gets really big.  Then you'll start to attract the attention of more malicious elements. All the noise will eventually be larger than any group of editors can handle."
Many of us believe Wikipedia will scale almost indefinitely. The more people there are to abuse it, the more people there are to ward off the abuse. As traffic increases, so does the number of people who work on and care about the project. We've been Slashdotted before, or had articles featured on TV, and had huge bursts of traffic, and while there were a few "malicious elements", they soon find out it's just not worth their while. After all, what is the satisfaction from defacing an article submitted to a non-profit organization anyone can contribute to? And then someone undoes it after five minutes so no one ever sees your brilliant joke! Not much satisfaction there. Bear in mind people have been telling us Wikipedia won't scale, since back in 2001, and so far it has.
"Wikipedia's current loading speed already ranges from extremely slow to glacial. As it grows, will it keep getting worse?"
However, as the value and promise of Wikipedia continues to grow, we believe even more individuals, corporations, and even governments around the world will see it is in their interest to support its continued availability and growth. Already hundreds of companies are mirroring its content online, effectively load-balancing the readership. Yahoo! has contributed a number of servers in Asia with no strings attached. The more technical problems we experience, the more concerned supporters take action to alleviate them.
Moreover, the open-source technology underlying Wikipedia, MediaWiki software based on the MySQL database management system, is being continuously improved. As time goes on, we will be able to serve more and more requests using the same amount of hardware.
"Some excellent contributors have left Wikipedia altogether: see Missing Wikipedians."
"Some articles end up being protected for very long periods of time, in direct conflict with the stated goal of Wikipedia."
Wikipedia is not "pure" open, but it is close to it. We try to make sure the only limitations made on editing are:
Protecting pages is actively discouraged (see Wikipedia:Protection policy and m:Protected pages considered harmful) and limited to a very select group of trusted users, only about a thousand out of many thousands. In this way we make the enforcement of the protection policy feasible. While there are cases where pages are protected without cause, any admin who is alerted to this can undo it, the wiki in effect again at a smaller scale.  Also, users may leave comments on the talk sections of protected pages.  This allows a user to make comments about the page or ask an administrator to make changes or make a case to unprotect the page.
"I am afraid you have some similarity with the communists. You should promote the values of capitalism and the free market; such as competition, individual property and intellectual property."
The idea of promoting any particular set of values is anathema to the ideal of creating a neutral encyclopedia, and is firmly rejected by the project. The purpose of this encyclopedia is to disseminate knowledge, not to push an agenda.Wikipedia has a neutral content policy, but that does not mean the methods it uses (such as the GFDL) aren't characteristic of a particular value system.Communism is associated with communal ownership of property. Capitalism creates private intellectual property with the intent of rewarding authors for creating, improving, and distributing content. It accomplishes this by restricting access to content, such that only paying customers may read it. As a result, fewer people have access to information. Therefore, fewer people get a chance to use that information to come up with new ideas. So the end result of a capitalist approach to intellectual property is that fewer ideas get created, and people have restricted access to existing ideas.{cn}The communist approach of communal ownership of information allows ideas to be distributed far and wide, stimulating intellectual growth and the creation of new ideas. To paraphrase a famous communist motto, Wikipedia's slogan could be "from each, according to their knowledge; to each, according to their curiosity".Besides, this is actually the way things have been done traditionally and up until fairly recent times. The "capitalist" notion of intellectual property is a modern invention.Wikipedia helps fuel the free market economy.  Lowering the cost of gathering information means better educated workers, scientists, engineers, and businesspeople. And that means innovation goes faster and reaches farther.  Speedy access to basic information may help speed technology transfer and research and development.Wikipedia does this without relying on government funding, unlike most basic research enterprises.Regardless of the internal organization of Wikipedia, it engages in external competition all the time. It is in the same line of business as rivals like Encyclopedia Britannica, Encarta, and the Columbia Encyclopedia, and other encyclopedia online projects like Citizendium and Conservapedia. It competes for similar "customers" (readers, paying or not), and is subject to the same competitive forces that determine the viability of this line of business, and of all competitors within it. That Wikipedia has served more customers than all its competitors combined is some indication it does compete, and does it well.Merely making content publicly available at no cost to the public does not forsake profit.  Terrestrial television and search engines like Google, are examples where gratis content is served, with money made through advertising. Some of Wikipedia's mirrors do this. Loss leaders can also boost sales of complementary products. For example, Red Hat complements its services with a free and gratis operating system. Microsoft complements its operating system with a gratis web browser.In addition, a mechanism of competition between individual contributions to articles works to maintain and usually, over time, raise, quality standards. Each individual edit "competes" with all of the other potential edits or reversions in the minds of all of the readers of that article, including the material it replaces; the winner is the best version (as judged according to the views of all contributors, duly channeled by deference to scholarship and argument on the talk pages)... until a better one comes along.So for those who believe competition is generally a good thing because it raises quality standards, Wikipedia is an excellent case example.The relative absence of central control is the diametric opposite of a centralised communist state.Contrary to POV 5, the reason for Wikipedia's ever-improving quality is cooperation, not competition. Articles on Wikipedia are written by collaborations of contributors, and the editing process does not involve users competing to censor each other's material and promote their own. True, there is plenty of friction and disagreement, but the practice of pushing your own views on an article while reverting other people's is considered abusive and detrimental to Wikipedia. The "winner", the best version, is the result of collective effort by all users working on a certain article; it is likely a good article contains bits and pieces of text written by dozens or even hundreds of people.Furthermore, Wikipedians get no material reward for their work.Wikipedia is more than just an economic entity; it is also a charitable enterprise.Traditional encyclopedias published by for-profit entities create a reasonably high barrier to access for people in developing countries, or even for poor developed-worlders for whom trotting down to the local library is either infeasible or inconvenient. Putting freely available encyclopedic content on the web is a form of economic assistance. There's also a social benefit to having better informed leaders, citizens, and voters.Wikipedia welcomes private donations (of both money and content), whether they are given because people find the service useful for themselves, or simply out of compassion.Wikipedia does not make money through advertising, and the Wikimedia Foundation has maintained a non-profit status, because doing otherwise would discourage some donors and thus interfere with the charitable mission.Wikipedia has very little hierarchy, and it is fundamentally opposed to any and all authoritarian principles. It reserves top-down powers to the barest necessary to maintain order and keep the project focused on a particular task. All activity on Wikipedia is voluntary and collaborative in nature. People have complete freedom to contribute or not contribute; if they choose to contribute, it is entirely up to them what kind of articles they wish to edit. Outside projects, including both those sponsored by the Foundation, forks, and independent but similar projects (such as wikitravel.org), are forming to support those who wish to work toward even broader goals. Everyone is allowed to criticize or comment on any portion of the project, and its content is determined in an entirely grass-roots fashion. Thus, if Wikipedia is inspired by communism at all, it is inspired by a form of anarchist communism.Communism and capitalism (among others) are full-fledged economic systems. They provide a framework within which people earn a living. But no one earns a living on Wikipedia. People live their entire lives in economic systems, but no one lives their entire life on Wikipedia (at least we hope not). Wikipedia is a hobby; something people do in their spare time. You can't compare it with a full economy, because it isn't one.Even the most die-hard libertarians are adamant that the public good is and must be served by the charitable actions of those who can afford to devote some time, energy, and other resources toward them, or society doesn't function well.  Philanthropy exists for a reason, and is a feature of Western, capitalist-leaning democracies far more so than communist regimes or deeply socialist states.  No one orders a successful businessperson to form a local sports league for community children and coach in it, and such a person usually doesn't demand a paycheck for doing so.  Charitable altruism is built into modern capitalization from the local level on up.  The vast majority of money for most non-profit enterprises comes from grants from corporations, entrepreneurs, and their charitable foundations, not from pocket-change donations of average people.  The public Internet itself, including the protocols and most of the software that runs it, was developed and deployed largely through volunteered labor and donated work, not jealously guarded intellectual property, nor (except in the earliest years) governmental fiat.Within any business enterprise, from a local restaurant to an international mega-corporation, collaborative team-work is required.  No one's job title is "collaborator"; everyone works together toward team and enterprise goals or soon finds themselves out of work.Wikipedia is no different.  It's built by a group effort toward agreed-upon goals by people who have the luxury of some time and attention to donate toward the project, and who do so because they recognize its potential as a good for society.  Imagine, instead, a Wikipedia – or an Internet for that matter – entirely created and controlled by a government (yours or anyone else's).Arguing over whether Wikipedia, or certain aspects of it, are more "communist" or more "capitalist" is a waste of time. The important thing is not what ideology inspires it, but whether or not it works.The following economic questions are more useful to ask:Some partial answers are presented as food for thought. Incentives for contribution include:Aspects of Wikipedia which increase efficiency:We are not aware of any research directly comparing the time-to-market of Wikipedia versus a traditional encyclopedia.  Any such comparison would be complex, given considerations of coverage, depth and quality. What we do know is that Wikipedia has already become one of the most popular reference sites on the planet, with over 20 million page views a day.  We have millions of articles, gigabytes of raw text and tens of thousands of contributors.  (For more and up-to-date numbers, see Wikipedia:Statistics.)  It has experienced literally exponential growth."Why is there a need for an encyclopedia at all?  Why not just go to your favorite search engine and search for whatever topic on which you're looking for information?  You're more likely to find it, and it'll be more interesting and more current."
Here's another glib answer: For that matter, you might just as well say: "Why is there a need for a paper encyclopedia at all?  Why not just go to your favorite library and search for whatever topic on which you're looking for information?"
Here's a longer answer. The Internet, armed with good search engines, functions not unlike a giant, and often useful, encyclopedia. But does it follow that there is no need for a free information, community-built encyclopedia? Not necessarily.
Indeed, the fact that search engines are merely often useful is a point worth noting. There is a lot of dross on the web; it's easy to get side-tracked by rubbish. Also many of the points above directed at the Wikipedia do apply to the Web at large.  A filtering mechanism of some kind is required. 
That mechanism can take many forms: personal skepticism, peer opinion, popular opinion or a centralised authority, for instance. Wikipedia provides another: that of mass peer review. It is a handy place to store stuff you find out. But if you can't substantiate what you say, others will remove it. An encyclopedia is not the place for things that are not certainly true. 
Also, even if Wikipedia only displayed existing knowledge, it has four important functions (as do all encyclopedias) that add value:
Another important value Wikipedia adds is that it is free. This means anyone will be able to use the content for any purpose, particularly for educational purposes. There are many great prospects in the use of a really huge, free encyclopedia for educational purposes. While the wiki system isn't necessary to produce such a body of data, convincing people to give away large amounts of their writing for free is difficult without the low bar the wiki system creates.
Additionally, it's important to note that both personal and organizational pages on the Web become out of date (so-called 'bit rot'). Errors of fact can remain in place for years with the only feedback mechanism being increasingly rare (due to spam) "mailto:" tags. With Wikipedia, all readers can be editors. Interested parties can keep articles up-to-date and current long after the original author has lost interest or has less time.
Finally, it is possible that in the fullness of time Wikipedia will contain more relevant, reliable information on any given topic than can be easily found via a search engine. That's certainly our plan for it.
"Wikipedia software is inadequate to the task of collaboratively writing an encyclopedia. It is hard to collaboratively edit images, there is no WYSIWYG editing, and anything complex requires reams of HTML."
In addition, a simplified image syntax has been introduced (see meta:image pages). There is also simplifying table markup – see Help:Table. The Wikipedia software is open source, so if you'd like to work on other extensions, then join the MediaWiki-L mailing list and offer your services.
Furthermore, the ever increasing popularity of Wikipedia has encouraged a number of dedicated developers to create WYSIWYG tools for editing Wikipedia articles. One such tool is the Wikipedia Extension available for the Firefox browser. The development of this and similar projects are excellent examples of the serious interest shown by the members of the community to make Wikipedia more user friendly.
And as of June 2014 a WYSIWYG editor for Wikipedia called Visual Editor is in beta test, and can be enabled by logged-in users. It's not finished yet, but it is good enough to use for many day to day tasks. As of 2020 or earlier it is the default editor  with wikitext as a parallel option.
"Many article titles are incorrectly capitalized. For example, the articles about eBay and pH are found at EBay and PH respectively, and there seems to be no progress in fixing this technical limitation."
"Many entries in highly specialized fields use jargon that will not be familiar to anyone not already knowledgeable in those fields.  How can this problem be alleviated?"
"What about Wikipedia hosting copyrighted images, texts, or works that would be against the law of many countries? The statement of such: 'Content must not violate any copyright and must be verifiable', won't necessarily be followed by an anonymous and easily accessed community."
The live web version of Wikipedia is also protected from being the target of crippling legal action by the same law that protects YouTube: in the United States, OCILLA forces copyright holders to inform Wikipedia and give them an opportunity to remove the offending material, and such requests are always honored.


