27600,
ScienceFictionandFantasyWritersAssociation,
The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, doing business as Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association, commonly known as SFWA (/ˈsɪfwə/ or /ˈsɛfwə/) is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization of professional science fiction and fantasy writers. While SFWA is based in the United States, its membership is open to writers worldwide. The organization was founded in 1965 by Damon Knight under the name Science Fiction Writers of America. The president of SFWA as of July 1, 2021 is Jeffe Kennedy.
As of 2022, SFWA has about 2,500 members worldwide.[1]
Active SFWA members may vote for the Nebula Awards, one of the principal English-language science fiction awards.
SFWA informs, supports, promotes, defends and advocates for its members.[2]
SFWA activities include informing science fiction and fantasy writers on professional matters, protecting their interests,[3] and helping them deal effectively with agents, editors, anthologists, and producers in print and non-print media;[4] encouraging public interest in and appreciation for science fiction and fantasy literature; sponsoring, editing, and disseminating writings, papers, books, pamphlets, and other publications which exemplify science fiction and fantasy literature of high quality; conducting conferences, public discussion groups, forums, lectures, and seminar programs; and furnishing services connected with this stated purpose.
Science Fiction Writers of America, Inc. was founded in 1965 by Damon Knight in association with a group of writers connected to the Milford Conference, which he also headed. According to Todd McCaffrey, the organization immediately "acquired great status in its efforts to help J.R.R. Tolkien get fair recompense in America for pirated sales of The Lord of the Rings".[5] In 1991, the name of the organization was changed to Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, to reflect the fact that the organization had always included writers working in multiple genres.[6] After the name change, both SFWA and SFFWA were used as acronyms. The acronym SFWA was re-established officially in 1996.[7]
In 1973, SFWA awarded an honorary membership to Polish author Stanisław Lem. Lem never had a high opinion of the genre, including American science fiction, describing it as ill-thought-out, poorly written, and interested more in making money than in ideas or new literary forms.[8] After his eventual American publication, when he became eligible for regular membership, his honorary membership was rescinded, following the stance taken mostly by Philip José Farmer. Several members protested that decision, including Ursula K. Le Guin, who quit her membership and then refused the Nebula Award for Best Novelette for The Diary of the Rose.[9][10]
In 1982, Lisa Tuttle withdrew her short story "The Bone Flute" from the final Nebula ballot, to protest what she saw as excessive campaigning for awards and that voters did not receive copies of nominated works. Her withdrawal was sent after voting had been completed. When informed she had won, she contacted SFWA and told them she refused to accept it. She was told that her reasons for doing so would be announced. Her publisher accepted the award in her place, apparently with no knowledge of her withdrawal, and there was no mention of her objection.[11]
In September 2009, SFWA joined the Open Book Alliance to oppose the Google Book Settlement.[12] As a party to the class action suit, SFWA had recently explained its reservations about the settlement and declared its intention to file an objection.[13]
In 2013, the SFWA Bulletin was the subject of a controversy about sexism (see below).[14] This led to a brief hiatus, followed by a reboot of the magazine.
In 2014, the original Massachusetts corporation was dissolved and SFWA reincorporated as a California nonprofit 501(c)3 organization with new bylaws.[15]
In 2022, the organization filed to do future business as the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association to reflect the participation of their non-US members.[16]
SFWA participates in various trade shows and publishing industry events in the United States and abroad, including BookExpo America, the American Library Association Midwinter Conference, the USA Science & Engineering Festival, and several major (and minor) science fiction, fantasy and media conventions. SFWA holds a semi-annual business meeting at the World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon) when it is held in North America, and at the North American Science Fiction Convention (NASFiC) otherwise.[17]
SFWA also hosts its own events, which include:
As an organization, SFWA acts as an advocate to effect important changes within the publishing industry, especially among publishers of science fiction and fantasy, by promoting author-friendly copyright legislation, equitable treatment of authors, and fair contract terms.
SFWA sponsors Writer Beware, whose mission is to track, expose, and raise awareness of the prevalence of fraud and other questionable activities in and around the publishing industry. Writer Beware[20] exists as a subpage of the SFWA website, which provides the latest information on literary schemes, scams, and pitfalls; the Writer Beware blog,[21] which provides the latest information on literary schemes, scams, and pitfalls; the Writer Beware blog, which provides up-to-the-minute information on specific scams and schemes, along with advice for writers and industry news and commentary; and the Writer Beware Facebook page, which posts links to articles, news items, and warnings of interest to writers, and provides a forum for discussion. Writer Beware receives the support of the Mystery Writers of America and the Horror Writers Association.[22]
Writer Beware maintains an extensive database of complaints on questionable literary agents, publishers, independent editors, writers’ services, contests, publicity services, and others, and offers a free research and information service for writers. Writer Beware staff assist law enforcement agencies with investigations of literary fraud, and have been instrumental in the convictions of several literary scammers.[23][24]
Griefcom, or the Grievance Committee, is formed of member volunteers who undertake to mediate writer disputes and grievances between member writers and their publishers.[4]
SFWA's Emergency Medical Fund was established to assist eligible writers who have unexpected medical expenses.[25]
SFWA's Legal Fund was established to create loans for eligible member writers who have writing-related court costs and other related legal expenses.[26]
Founded by longtime SFWA member Bud Webster, the Estate Project is now headed by Mishell Baker. It maintains a list of the estates of deceased SFWA member writers and coordinates with living member writers to make arrangements for their future estates. The Estate Project also accumulates information about authors' archives for member writers, living or dead.29.[27]
The SFWA Bulletin is a quarterly magazine that SFWA members receive as part of their membership, but it is also available (by subscription) to non-members. The Bulletin carries nonfiction articles of general interest to writers, especially science fiction and fantasy writers. It accepts submissions, for which the pay rate is 8 cents a word.[4] The current Bulletin editor is Neil Clarke.[38]
In 2013, a controversy about sexism in the Bulletin led to the resignation of editor Jean Rabe on June 5, 2013.[39] More than 50 authors[40] wrote blog posts in objection to comments by longtime contributors Mike Resnick and Barry N. Malzberg that included references to "lady editors" and "lady writers" who were "beauty pageant beautiful" or a "knock out", an article by C. J. Henderson praising Barbie for maintaining "quiet dignity the way a woman should",[39] and the "exploitative"[40] cover image of no. 200 of the Bulletin depicting a woman in a chain-mail bikini. Several authors used the occasion to speak out against sexism in science fiction genre circles more broadly.[14] The controversy continued through Bulletin no. 202, which contained another column by Resnick and Malzberg, discussing the response to their earlier column.[41] Their column framed that response as censorship, referring to their critics as "liberal fascists".[42] In February 2014 a proposal to establish an advisory board to oversee content was met by a petition circulated by editor and critic Dave Truesdale supporting freedom of speech in the Bulletin.[43]
As a result of the controversy, SFWA president John Scalzi apologized to members,[44] and the Bulletin was put on hiatus for six months.[45] It reappeared with the Winter 2014 Special Issue, #203, but has been on a reduced schedule, publishing an average of 2 issues per year.
The special issue was edited by Tansy Rayner Roberts and Jaym Gates and "was specially created to be used as an outreach tool for conventions and other events."[46] The issue's contents and cover were welcomed by some as an antidote to the perceived sexism of past issues[47] though Sue Granquist felt that something looked "suspiciously like a woman in a burka".[48]
The Forum Binary is a biannual publication that functions as SFWA's internal publication of record for members. As such, it is not available to non-members.
SFWA also publishes short essays and other content relevant to writers on the SFWA Blog.
Most members live in the United States but membership is open to qualifying writers worldwide. Authors, regardless of nationality or residence, must be professionally published in a qualifying market as listed by SFWA in order to become SFWA members. At present, all listed qualifying markets publish only in the English language.[49]
Dues range from $90 for Associate membership up to $115 for Affiliate membership.[49]



Information box
{'Founded': '1965', 'Founder': 'Damon Knight', 'Type': 'Advocacy group, trade association', 'Legal status': '501(c)(3)', 'Purpose': 'SFWA informs, supports, promotes, defends and advocates for its members.', 'Headquarters': 'Enfield, CT', 'Region served': 'Worldwide', 'Membership': 'Approx. 2,500 members[1]', 'President': 'Jeffe Kennedy', 'Website': 'sfwa.org'}