31504,
Taitō,

Taitō (台東区, Taitō-ku) is a special ward in the Tokyo Metropolis in Japan. In English, it is known as Taitō City.[1]
As of May 1, 2015, the ward has an estimated population of 186,276, and a population density of 18,420 persons per km2. The total area is 10.11 square kilometres (3.90 sq mi). This makes Taito ward the smallest of Tokyo's wards in area, and third-smallest in population.
The ward was founded on March 15, 1947, with the merger of the old Asakusa and Shitaya wards when Tokyo City was transformed into Tokyo Metropolis. During the Edo period, the Yoshiwara licensed quarter was in what is now Taitō. Taitō shares the same Chinese characters, "台東" with Taitung, a city in Taiwan.
Situated in the northeastern portion of the wards area of Tokyo, Taitō is surrounded by five other special wards: Chiyoda, Bunkyō, Arakawa, Sumida and Chūō.

Taitō is famous for its typical Shitamachi districts.
Prefectural public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education.
Private schools:
The school district of the metropolis also operates one metropolitan junior high school:
The Taito City Board of Education (台東区教育委員会) operates municipal elementary and junior high schools.
Municipal junior high schools:[3]
Municipal elementary schools:[4]
Taito operates several public libraries, including the Central Library, the Central Library Asakusabashi Branch, the Negishi Library, and the Ishihama Library. The Central Library is located in the first and second floors of the Lifelong Learning Center.[5]
The city operates the Lifelong Learning Center, a complex including a multi-media room, a studio, and other facilities. The Central Library is on the first and second floors of the Lifelong Learning Center.[5]
Eiken Chemical, a clinical diagnostics and equipment manufacturer, has its headquarters in Taito.[6]
Tokyo Ricoh Office Solution and Ricoh Technosystems, divisions of Ricoh, are headquartered in Taitō as of 2008.[7][8] Chikumashobo, a publisher, has its headquarters in the Kuramae (蔵前) area of the ward.[9]
The City of Taito operates the Taito Riverside Sports Center. The center includes a gymnasium, tennis courts, two baseball fields for adults, one baseball field for children, one large swimming pool, one children's pool, and an athletic field. The gymnasium includes two courts, two budo halls, a Japanese-style archery range, a sumo ring, a training room, a table tennis room, an air-rifle shooting range, and a meeting room.[5]



Information box
{'Country': 'Japan', 'Region': 'Kantō', 'Prefecture': 'Tokyo Metropolis', ' • Mayor': 'Yukuo Hattori', ' • Total': '211,444', ' • Density': '20,914/km2 (54,170/sq mi)', 'Time zone': 'UTC+9 (Japan Standard Time)', 'Tree': 'Cherry blossom', 'Flower': 'Ipomoea nil', 'City Hall Address': 'Higashiueno 4-5-6, Taitō-ku, Tokyo 110-8615', 'Website': 'www.city.taito.lg.jp'}