19185,
TransportinMauritania,

Citizens of Mauritania have various transportation methods. Railways and highways connect major cities in the country. Mauritania is a coastal country so there are many ports along its coast and there are a few big rivers that run through the country. Lastly, there are 26 airports spread out throughout the country.There are no rail links with adjacent countries.
In 2008, a railway was proposed that would link Nouakchott with Tiguint, Mederdra, R'Kiz, Leguatt, Leeleibatt, Menjem Boffal, Kaedi, and Bofal.
Sudan's Danfodio Holding and China's Transtech Engineering have signed an agreement to build a 460 million euro ($634 million) railway linking Mauritania's capital Nouakchott with southern phosphate deposits at Bofal.[4]  The 430 km (270 mi) line would run close to the southern frontier with Senegal.  It is hoped that the new line would link with existing lines just across the border in Senegal, Mali[5] There is no through link to Burkina Faso.  There are problems of choice of gauge.
There are 450 km of Motorway in Mauritania (in 2010), connecting Nouakchott to Nouadhibou along a coastal route. A motorway linking Nouakchott to Rosso is under construction (due for completion in 2012).
Mauritania has only about 3,000 km (1,900 mi) of surfaced roads, 710 km (440 mi) of unsurfaced roads, and 5,140 km (3,190 mi) of unimproved tracks.[8] The country's size and harsh climate make road maintenance and repair especially problematic.[8] Overland travel is difficult and roadside assistance is almost nonexistent.[8] Public transportation is not safe and road conditions in Mauritania are poor, particularly in the interior.[8] Driving in Mauritania can be treacherous, and many Mauritanians drive without regard to traffic signs or rules.[8] Roadway obstructions and hazards caused by drifting sand, animals, and poor roads often plague motorists.[8]
The Cairo-Dakar Highway in the Trans-African Highway network passes through Mauritania, linking Nouakchott to Rabat, Tangiers, Algiers, and Tripoli.  The section between the capital Nouakchott and the port of Nouadhibou was paved by 2018; only a few kilometres remain unpaved at the Moroccan border fr:Transport en Mauritanie. From Dakar there are links throughout western Africa.
The north-western end of the Trans–West African Coastal Highway is considered by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to originate in Nouakchott.
(from north to south)
See Airports in Mauritania
By city: 
See Airports in Mauritania


