34088,
WikiProjectDogsDogbreedstaskforce,
A few Wikipedians have gotten together to make some suggestions about how we might organize articles about various dog breed descriptions.  These are things to give you focus and to get you going, and you shouldn't feel obligated in the least to start out by following them—mainly, we just want you to write articles!   But if you don't know what to write or where to begin, following the below guidelines may be helpful.  If you add or change something that's inconsistent with the rest of the dog breed articles, that's OK--someone will most likely notice it and edit it for you.
Dog breeds task force of WikiProject Dogs
This task force aims primarily to provide a full description of the various Dog breeds.  A consistent outline format is provided, including a list of various breed characteristics.
No classification of dog breeds has been clearly defined. See this example on dividing a topic into a hierarchy.
By convention, category notation goes at the end of the article before interlanguage links:
FYI, both are subcategories of Category:Dogs.
There have been occasional discussions about creating additional subcategories for each of the dog types, because there will likely be over 600 dogs in the BREEDS category when all is said and done. If this happens, breeds would be listed in BREEDS and in the subcategory.  (noted Feb 20, 2005).
A list of articles needing cleanup associated with this project is available. See also the tool's wiki page and the index of WikiProjects.
If you want to keep tabs on what anyone is doing with any breed page--for example, newcomers creating new breed pages, you can add every breed in List of dog breeds to your watchlist, including articles that don't yet exist. (Just click on the link, which gives you an edit page, and simply turn on Watch this Page.)  Yup, it takes a while to add them all...
(An alternative (quicker) way to achieve the same effect is to:
Or focus on a subset of breeds, existing and not, in which you're particularly interested.  Or just browse when the mood strikes you.
Recent changes for Category:Dog_breeds will show the changes of the articles in that category.
There is are also public watchlists at:
The  related changes links will show all recent changes to articles and talk pages listed on these pages.  This is freely editable, but please take care in removing articles from this list.
There currently exists an article entitled List of dog breeds, which enumerates the various recognized breeds.  Breed articles that already exist and are labeled with Category:Dog breeds appear on that category page, as well.
Title: The article for each breed shall be titled based on the apparently most-common official breed name from the major registries.  These names have been placed in the List of dog breeds page. (E.g., Welsh Corgi (Pembroke).) Where the major registries are evenly split on the name, or where the breed is not recognised by the major registries, the article title shall be chosen using the most commonly used name in English language sources, such as the English translation of the name used in the international Fédération Cynologique Internationale breed standard.
Redirects: When creating a new page, redirects (or disambiguations under other possible names should be created to point to the page (e.g., Pembroke, Pembroke Welsh Corgi).
The article on each breed shall include the following information:
The following list is only a general suggestion, and should be re-ordered as necessary.
Each dog breed article will have an infobox; see /Templates subpage.



