33633,
WikiProjectSports,
Welcome to WikiProject Sports.  This collaboration resource and group is dedicated to improving Wikipedia's coverage of sports, including the organization of information and articles on this topic area.  This page and its subpages contain suggestions and various resources, including article assessment information, that we hope help focus the efforts of other Wikipedians to improve all sport related articles in order to make Wikipedia an excellent resource for sports-related information for all who visit.  And we are here to point editors in the right direction to get involved in child projects that focus on their more particular sporting interests.  If you would like to help, please inquire on the talk page, join the project, and see the to-do list below.
This WikiProject aims primarily to:
 To-do list for Wikipedia:WikiProject Sports: edit · history · watch · refresh · Updated 2021-05-04

Any member of WikiProject Sports may assess Sports-related articles by following the guidelines below. If you aren't sure about an article, ask about it on the assessment page.
An article's quality assessment is generated from the class parameter in the {{WikiProject Sports}} project banner on its talk page:
The following values may be used for the class parameter to describe the quality of the article (see Wikipedia:Content assessment for assessment criteria):
For non-standard grades and non-mainspace content, the following values may be used for the class parameter:
These are some of the most important articles to improve to GA-quality or better - or at least cleanup to B-class without tags.

Articles for deletion
Proposed deletions
Categories for discussion
Templates for discussion
Redirects for discussion
Featured list candidates
Good article nominees
Requested moves
Articles to be merged
Articles to be split
Articles for creation

For all participants to use I have created a userbox to both declare your allegiance to the project and to increase the visibility of the project to the community.
There shall be an alphabetical list of all sports.  There shall also be an organization of sports by categories.  There shall be a listing of sport competitions, that involve multiple sports (e.g. the Olympics, the Commonwealth Games, the Maccabiah Games, the Good Will Games, etc.) -- competitions for particular sports, or groups of sports, would be better located on the page for that sport.  The lists of competitions should be organized along the lines of what area of the world they involve -- i.e. are they global (e.g. the Olympics), restricted to a particular region of the world (Americas, Asia, Europe, Africa, etc.), or restricted to a particular country (in which case, they could be placed under a section on the sport in that particular country.)  These lists shall be either on the main Sports page, or if they become too long on separate pages linked to by the main page.
Suggested topics:
The purpose of these articles (e.g., History of baseball, 2009 in sports) is to summarise significant events that are relevant to the sport or period under review.  It is very important that the articles are not encumbered by excessive detail, particularly where a certain theme is being promoted.  This is in accordance with general Wikipedia guidelines and policies such as WP:NOT#STATS, WP:UNDUEWEIGHT and WP:NOTDIRECTORY.
For that reason, the project has decided to exclude lists of births and deaths.  Births have no conceivable importance to sports in the year of the person's birth, no matter how famous the person might become a generation hence. Deaths of active sportspersons are significant but must be recorded under a section about the relevant sport or the relevant time period.
Articles that cover a sport's general history must be categorised in Category:History of sports and a category specific to the history of that sport. Histories of specific events in a sport or covering a limited period only must not be categorised in the sports history category.
Currently, there are relatively few general histories about individual sports and most sports have their histories within the sport's own article (e.g., the history of boxing is in the main boxing article, whereas baseball has a history of baseball article). Until such time as a general history of the sport can be created, the main article must be included in the sports history category.

No official classification of Sports has been defined.
However:
See Wikipedia:WikiProject Council/Directory/Culture/Sports for an up-to-date chart showing all sports WikiProjects and their interrelations.



Information box
{'Country': 'Australia', 'Governing body': 'Australian Football League', 'National team(s)': 'Australia', 'First played': '1858, Melbourne, Victoria', 'Registered players': '539,526 (total)\n120,000 (adult)', 'Clubs': '2,548', 'Single match': '121,696 - 1970 VFL Grand Final', 'Season': '6,283,788 - 2005 AFL season'}