33719,
WimKok,

Willem "Wim" Kok (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈʋɪm ˈkɔk] (listen); 29 September 1938 – 20 October 2018) was a Dutch politician and trade union leader who served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 22 August 1994 until 22 July 2002.[1][2] He was a member of the Labour Party (PvdA).
Kok studied business administration at the Nyenrode Business School obtaining a Bachelor of Business Administration degree and worked as a trade union leader for the Trade Unions Association from 1961 until 1976 and serving as chairman from 1972. In 1976 it merged to form the Federation of Dutch Trade Unions, with Kok serving as its first chairman until 1986. After the election of 1986, Kok was elected as a Member of the House of Representatives, taking office on 3 June 1986. Shortly after the election incumbent Leader Joop den Uyl announced he was stepping down and endorsed Kok as his successor taking office on 21 July 1986. For the election of 1989, Kok served as Lijsttrekker (top candidate) and made a coalition accord with incumbent Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) which formed the Cabinet Lubbers III and became deputy prime minister and minister of finance taking office on 7 November 1989.
For the election of 1994, Kok again served as Lijsttrekker and following a cabinet formation, formed the Cabinet Kok I and became Prime Minister of the Netherlands taking office on 22 August 1994. For the election of 1998 Kok once more served as Lijsttrekker and after another successful cabinet formation, formed the Cabinet Kok II and continued as prime minister for a second term. In December 2001, Kok announced he was stepping down as Leader and that he would not stand for the election of 2002 or serve another term as prime minister. Kok left office following the installation of the Cabinet Balkenende I on 22 July 2002.
Kok retired from active politics at 63 and became active in the private and public sectors as a corporate and non-profit director, served on several state commissions [nl] and councils on behalf of the government, and continued to be active as a lobbyist for the European Union, advocating for more European integration. Kok was known for his abilities as a manager and negotiator. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for several major social reforms legalizing same-sex marriage, euthanasia and further reducing the deficit. Kok was granted the honorary title of Minister of State on 11 April 2003 and continued to comment on political affairs as a statesman until his death at the age of 80. He holds the distinction of leading the first purple coalitions as Prime Minister and is consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as one of the best prime ministers after World War II.[2][3][4][5]
Willem Kok was born on 29 September 1938, in Bergambacht in the Netherlands Province of South Holland, the son of Willem Kok (29 March 1910 – 10 January 1981) a carpenter, and Neeltje de Jager (17 October 1913 – 5 May 2005).[6] He was a Calvinist and had one younger brother who was born in 1945.[7][8]
After completing his studies in business at the Nyenrode Business Universiteit, he started his career in 1961 at the socialist Netherlands Association of Trade Unions (NVV), where he was chairman from 1973 until 1982. In 1982, the NVV merged with Nederlands Katholiek Vakverbond (NKV), the Catholic trade union, to form the Federatie Nederlandse Vakbeweging (FNV), of which he served as chair until 1986.[9]
Kok was elected as a Member of the House of Representatives on 3 June 1986, after the Dutch general election of 1986. Soon after the election Joop den Uyl the Leader of the Labour Party and Parliamentary leader of the Labour Party in the House of Representatives announced that he was stepping down after serving twenty years as Leader of the Labour Party. Kok was elected to succeed him and became Party and Parliamentary leader of the Labour Party in the House of Representatives on 21 July 1986 and served as Opposition leader during the parliamentary period of the Cabinet Lubbers II.[10]
Kok lead his party in the Dutch general election of 1989. The Labour Party lost three seats but the following cabinet formation resulted in a coalition agreement with the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) which formed the Cabinet Lubbers III. Kok entered government for the first time and became both Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Minister of Finance, serving from 7 November 1989 until 22 August 1994.[11]
In the 1994 general election, the Labour Party lost twelve seats but the CDA with new leader Elco Brinkman lost twenty seats. The Labour Party became the largest party in the House of Representatives, after an arduous cabinet formation with the conservative liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) and the social liberal Democrats 66 (D66) a deal was struck that resulted in the Cabinet Kok I, with Kok as prime minister. It was considered groundbreaking in Dutch politics this was the first Cabinet of the Netherlands since 1908 without a Christian democratic party.[10]
The main aim of the Cabinet Kok I was to create employment. The Dutch economy had been in a deep recession for years. The market was allowed more influence in the economy. This led to a policy of tax reduction, economizing, and trying to keep people out of social care by supporting employment; large infrastructure projects were set in motion. Another aim was to put an end to the enormous debt of the Dutch government.[10] The Treaty of Amsterdam was signed during this cabinet. The Srebrenica massacre occurred under the responsibility of this government, which eventually led to the fall of the second Kok cabinet.
Kok’s first term also saw various cuts and changes to education and welfare. Regarding education, spending on education, culture and sciences was cut by 1,772 million guilders. In addition, according to one study, “A law concerning the modernization of the universities administrative structure replaced the democratized structure of the 1970s with a more autocratic system, inspired by the management style of business concerns.” Although primary education received some extra money, which made it possible to introduce computers and decrease the average number of pupils in 4 years, the latter resulted in a shortage of classrooms and teachers.[12] Before 1996, the government provided a study allowance to people with a low income. That year, the Study Costs Allowance Act was introduced, under which the number of standard amounts decreased and hard income limits were introduced. According to one study, “It soon became apparent that the WTS gave rise to a lot distressing situations. These situations mainly related to the hard income limits that led to a major drop in income. In addition, the income limit of the WTS was independent of the number of children per family.” In the 1998 coalition agreement however, “these hard limits were corrected and more money was made available to more people.”[13] Regarding welfare, amendments were made to the General Child Benefit Act in 1995, under which benefit was increased with age only for the first child, while from 1996 child benefit only became payable for children up until the age of 18, while previously child benefit was paid up until the age of 24 under certain circumstances.[14] Social Assistance was revised in 1995, with a tightening of both eligibility and entitlement rules.[15] A special supplement for pensioners was abolished, the eligibility criteria were tightened, certain cash benefits to children and widows were reduced, unemployment eligibility criteria were tightened, and benefits were cut in the disability pension scheme.[16] A linking law was adopted, which made it possible to link data sets from the population register, social security, and the aliens police
(where all aliens must register). The goal of this was to oppose illegal residence by excluding illegal aliens from collective provisions such as social security benefits.[17] In 1996 compulsory sick pay was entirely privatized, and wage continuation as a percentage of usual wages went down from 75 to 70%, although duration was extended to 52 weeks.[18] As noted by one study, “For people with a minimum social benefit and children, purchasing power decreased in the first three years of the cabinet’s term of office. During the whole cabinet period their purchasing power increased with a meagre two-tenths of a per cent per annum, due to an increase oftwo per cent in the election year (cpb 1998: 22,168-177).” Under pressure from the churches and other groupings, however, “the cabinet placed the problem of poverty on the policy agenda.” Some support was given to financially vulnerable groups, with compensations in the individual rent subsidy for households with children and an income at the level of the social minimum, measures for those elderly with only a general old age pension or a small additional pension, and a higher extra allowance for the first child. In addition, before the elections of 1998 “the decreased purchasing power was repaired with 850 million guilders, mainly for people on social benefit.”[19]
Despite its cuts and changes to welfare and education, a number of progressive measures were introduced during the Wok cabinet's time in office. In 1994 a reform was passed including part-time workers in the occupational pension schemes.[20] In terms of residential care, a personal budget was introduced in 1995 to meet various individual needs; offering a choice “between care in kind, or cash payments that could also be used to purchasing services from private and market sector.”[21] Employment protection was also maintained while past plans to reduce it were “shelved,” income tax for the lower paid was cut, and 40,000 jobs in the public sector for the long-term unemployed were created.[22] From 1995, “elderly people with an income in the first tax bracket have a tax benefit. Due to the elderly person's deduction, the net AOW pension is higher.” In 1997, a separate tax deduction for single elderly persons was introduced on 1 January 1997. According to one study, “For this group of elderly people with only an AOW pension, this measure provides an additional income benefit of approximately 1 percent (approximately NLG 160 on an annual basis).”[23] The personal contribution scheme of a Disablity Facilities Act (Wvg) was also considerably relaxed as of the 1st of April 1996. According to one report “The personal contribution for a wheelchair has been cancelled and for the other facilities in kind it remains limited to f 100.”[24]
Under a circular from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment dated the 6th of June 1996 (BZ/UK/96/2613), municipalities “have been given the option of allocating municipal income support benefits categorically (the effect of this circular has been extended by the letter of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment of 30 May 2000, no. BZ/IW/00/34933A).” An amendment to the General Assistance Act (Abw) 'in connection with the prevention and combating of poverty and social exclusion' (Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 193 of 2 May 1997) “has ensured that from 1 July 1997 municipalities can also provide categorical special assistance in addition to individual special assistance.”[25] The government also attempted to support child care through the Stimulation of Child Care Act (1996), which made childcare provisions “a shared responsibility between the government, the employer and the working parent.”[26] From 1996, municipalities “have been able to appeal to a new subsidy option to provide childcare to single parents on social assistance, who are following schooling or who accept part-time or full-time work.” In 1996 some 525 municipalities applied for this subsidy.[27] As of the 1st of January 1997, municipalities and water boards "have more extensive opportunity to grant a waiver."[28]
In 1997, more flexibility introduced into the parental leave scheme, with employees able to request to spread leave over more than 26 weeks or take up more hours per week.[29] That same year the rent subsidy was changed, with subject subsidies for tenants becoming more explicitly aimed at support for lower-income groups.[30] Also in 1997, coverage of the AWBZ (a separate mandatory insurance scheme for long-term care set up in 1968) was extended to residential care for the elderly.[31] From 1997 the TOG act on ‘allowance for cost of maintenance of multiple and severely physically handicapped children’ “offers a financial support to parents who look after their severely handicapped children (3 till 18 years) at their home.”[32] In January 1998, national Disability Insurance was abolished, but a new scheme called Wajong was introduced.[33] In addition, An Act of the 24th of April 1997 provided for “a new insurance to protect self-employed workers and their spouses in case of long-term disability.”[34] An Act of the 11th of September 1997 provided for “new regulations that concern persons who are under the age of 65, suffer from physical or mental disabilities and can therefore only work full-time in jobs which are especially suited for them.” It also provided that each community ("gemeente") “has the responsibility to provide as many employment opportunities as possible to persons who are considered able to work only in jobs tailored to their needs or capacities.”[35] From July 1997 onwards,[36] “the residents of care homes no longer pay individually for the viewing and listening fee.”[37]
From April 1998, onwards, persons aged 65 and above received a higher social assistance benefit than other persons entitled to social assistance, known as the elderly person norm.[38]  An Act of the 23rd of April 1998 established new rules with regard to the (re)integration of the disabled, such as renumeration, the promotion of equal opportunities, the provision of facilities, reintegration benefits, allowances for occupationally disabled WAZ insured persons, income supplements for occupationally disabled self-employed persons, wage supplements, and starter loans.[39]
In the 1998 general election, the Labour party gained eight seats; the coalition retained its majority, and cabinet formation resulted in a continuation of policies with the Cabinet Kok II.[citation needed]
The second cabinet was the successor of the first cabinet was formed from the same coalition of PvdA, VVD and D66. It was also known as the "second purple cabinet" called such because it contained both the social-democratic PvdA (red) and the liberal VVD (blue). The aim of the cabinet was to continue the policy of cabinet Kok I, which was concerned with economizing, tax reduction, and making an end to unemployment. Kok was the prime minister, Annemarie Jorritsma as the deputy prime minister for the VVD, and Els Borst for D66. The cabinet had both left-wing and right-wing political parties as a part of it. There was no strong opposition in the House of Representatives. This did not mean that Kok did not face any problems. In May 1999, D66 stepped out of the coalition when proposed legislation on referendums, entered by this party, was blocked; through negotiations the crisis was solved and the cabinet stayed together. Moreover, allegations of expenses abuse were made against Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations Bram Peper from the time he was mayor of Rotterdam. On 13 March 2000 Peper resigned as minister, according to himself to no longer bring problems to the public government, and to be better able to defend himself.[40] On the other hand, Kok's second term is known for legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia.[10] A number of other reforms were also realised. A reform of bankruptcy was carried out, with the Bankruptcy Act providing a debt rescheduling scheme for natural persons as of the 1st of December 1998.[41] In January 1999 the Flexibility and Security Act took effect, which made “fixed employment more flexible and increased the security of flexible employees.” On 1 November 1999, a new law on working conditions took effect, which created scope “for a more prominent role of works councils in the field of working conditions.”[42] A system of penalties was also introdcued under which the Labour Inspectorate may fine any employer “who has not drawn up a risk inventory and assessment covering risks to pregnant women and those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, who does not provide the women concerned with information about the potential risks, or who does not offer alternative work if necessary.”[43] In 1999 a scheme was introduced called WWIK (Law for Work and Income Provision of Artists), under which poor artists “who would otherwise need social benefits can for a maximum of four years receive the WWIK benefits while still being allowed to earn some money in the arts and without an obligation to apply for other jobs.”[44] The Adaptation of Working Hours Act gave employees “the right to request the shortening or lengthening of their working hours.” One of the aims of the law was to promote the combination of work and care duties for both men and women.[45] A Student Finance Act was introduced in 2000 with the intention of making it financially possible for everyone in the Netherlands to study. Under this Act, “as a student you may be entitled to a loan or gift from the government.”[46]
Under the Working Hours Act of 2000 part-time workers were granted an explicit right to equal treatment in all areas negotiated by the social partners, such as second tier pensions, holiday pay, subsidized care provision, training and education, basic social security, and wages. From 2001 onwards counselling, training, and job offers were provided for all jobseekers after being unemployed for 6 months.[47] On 1 January 2002 a new Work and Care Act came into force. This legislation brought together various existing and new leave provisions and sought to facilitate the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities. In addition to the amendment of existing regulations, such as those governing maternity and parental leave, new provisions covered the right to adjust working hours if personal circumstances require; two days of paid paternity leave; four weeks' leave for couples who adopt a child; and two days of paid leave per year for urgent personal reasons, along with 10 days of paid leave a year to care for family members.[48] In 2001, a Labor Income Tax Credit (similar to the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States) was introduced, providing tax relief to earners of labor income as a means of incentivizing employment.[49]  An extra tax credit for households with children was also introduced,[50] along with the general tax credit (the successor to the tax-free allowance),[51] and the young disabled person's tax credit for employees receiving a Wajong benefit.[52] In addition, according to one study the percentage of the population living in poverty fell during Kok’s second term in office.[53]
On 15 December 2001, Kok announced he would retire from national politics after the elections of May 2002. He stood down as Leader of the Labour Party that same day, in favour of Ad Melkert. Unfortunately, Melkert did not appeal to the voter. Moreover, the "polder model" went out of fashion in early 2002, which saw the rise of Pim Fortuyn, a political newcomer.
On 16 April 2002, close to the natural end of term for the cabinet, prime minister Kok wished to resign early after being harshly criticised in a government-commissioned report by the NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies regarding the fall of Srebrenica in 1995[54] and the other ministers had no choice but to follow him. The second Kok cabinet remained in place as a caretaker cabinet, which had to cope with the murder of Fortuyn, and the CDA with leader Jan Peter Balkenende winning the elections. The caretaker cabinet stepped down on 22 July 2002, when the Cabinet Balkenende I was installed.[2]
Kok was highly praised for his Third Way and polder model philosophies and for the success of leading his Purple Coalitions. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for implementing several social reforms, legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia,[54] stimulating the economy resulting in more employment and privatization and further reducing the deficit. As a result of this, and because of his skills as manager and negotiator, Kok was praised by his fellow European leaders.[54]
After his premiership, Kok retired from active politics at the age of sixty-three and became a lobbyist for the European Union and presided over several "high-level groups". He also occupied numerous seats on supervisory boards in the business and industry world (ING Group, Koninklijke TNT Post, Royal Dutch Shell, KLM, Stork B.V., International Commission on Missing Persons, International Crisis Group, Anne Frank Foundation and served as president of the Club of Madrid from 2009 until December 2013).[55] On 11 April 2003, he was granted the honorary title of Minister of State.[56]
Between April and November 2004, Kok headed up a review of the Lisbon Strategy and presented a report containing suggestions on how to give new impetus to the Lisbon process.[57] The European Commission used this report to declare that the social and environmental parts are no longer a priority and declared a return to the Lisbon Agenda under economic terms only. Kok lobbied for the Lisbon Strategy of the European Commission and was appointed to the Honorary Board of the European Association of History Educators.[58]
Between 2006 and 2007, Kok served as member of the Amato Group, a group of high-level European politicians unofficially working on rewriting the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe into what became known as the Treaty of Lisbon following its rejection by French and Dutch voters.[59]
In 1965, after four years of dating, Kok married Margrietha Lummechiena "Rita" Roukema (born 3 November 1939).[60] He adopted her two children from a previous marriage, daughter Carla (born 1959) and son André (born 1961 and died March 30, 2022), who was mentally disabled, and together they had a third child, son Marcel (born 1966).[61]
Kok died on 20 October 2018 in Amsterdam, aged 80.[62]



Information box
{'Monarch': 'Beatrix', 'Deputy': 'Wim Meijer\nThijs Wöltgens\nJacques Wallage\nAd Melkert', 'Preceded by': 'Joop den Uyl', 'Succeeded by': 'Thijs Wöltgens', 'Prime Minister': 'Ruud Lubbers', 'Born': 'Willem Kok\n29 September 1938\nBergambacht, Netherlands', 'Died': '20 October 2018 (aged 80)\nAmsterdam, Netherlands', 'Political party': 'Labour Party (from 1961)', 'Spouse': 'Margrietha Lummechiena Roukema\n(m. 1965)', 'Alma mater': 'Nyenrode Business School\n(BBA)', 'Occupation': 'PoliticianTrade union leaderBusinessmanCorporate directorNonprofit directorLobbyistActivist', 'Signature': '', 'Allegiance': ' Netherlands', 'Branch/service': 'Royal Netherlands Army', 'Years of service': '1958–1959 (Conscription)\n1959–1961 (Reserve)', 'Rank': 'Private first class'}