34393,
Yulelog,
The Yule log, Yule clog, or Christmas block is a specially selected log burnt on a hearth as a winter tradition in regions of Europe, and subsequently North America. The origin of the folk custom is unclear. Like other traditions associated with Yule (such as the Yule boar), the custom may ultimately derive from Proto-Indo-European religion as similar traditions have been recorded in Celtic, Germanic, Baltic and Slavic paganism, among others.
American folklorist Linda Watts provides the following overview of the custom:
The familiar custom of burning the Yule log dates back to earlier solstice celebrations and the tradition of bonfires. The Christmas practice calls for burning a portion of the log each evening until Twelfth Night (January 6). The log is subsequently placed beneath the bed for luck, and particularly for protection from the household threats of lightning and, with some irony, fire. Many have beliefs based on the yule log as it burns, and by counting the sparks and such, they seek to discern their fortunes for the new year and beyond.[1]
Watts notes that the Yule log is one of various "emblem[s] of divine light" that feature in winter holiday customs (other examples include the Yule fire and Yule candle).[1]
According to the Dictionary of English Folklore, although the concept of Yule extends far into the ancient Germanic record long before Christianization, the first "clear" references to the tradition appear in the 17th century, and thus it is unclear from where or when exactly the custom extends.[2] However, it has long been observed that the custom may have much earlier origins, extending from customs observed in Germanic paganism. As early as 1725, Henry Bourne sought an origin for the Yule log in Anglo-Saxon paganism:
More recently, G. R. Willey (1983) says:
The events of Yule were generally held to have centred on Midwinter (although specific dating is a matter of debate), and feasting, drinking, and sacrifice (blót) were involved. Scholar Rudolf Simek comments that the pagan Yule feast "had a pronounced religious character" and that "it is uncertain whether the Germanic Yule feast still had a function in the cult of the dead and in the veneration of the ancestors, a function which the mid-winter sacrifice certainly held for the West European Stone and Bronze Ages." Yule customs and the traditions of the Yule log, Yule goat, and Yule boar (Sonargöltr) are still reflected in the Christmas ham, Yule singing, and others, which Simek takes as "indicat[ing] the significance of the feast in pre-Christian times."[5]
The first mention of a log burned around Christmas comes from Robert Herrick's poetry collection of 1648 where it is called a "Christmas log".[6] It is not referred to as a "Yule log" until John Aubrey's work from 1686. Prior to that century, there has been no evidence of Yule logs let alone evidence that can be traced back to the holiday of Yule.[7]
The Yule log is recorded in the folklore archives of much of England, but particularly in collections covering the West Country and the North Country.[2] For example, in his section regarding "Christmas Observances", J. B. Partridge recorded then-current (1914) Christmas customs in Yorkshire, Britain involving the Yule log as related by "Mrs. Day, Minchinhampton (Gloucestershire), a native of Swaledale". The custom is as follows:
H. J. Rose records a similar folk belief from Killinghall, Yorkshire in 1923: "In the last generation the Yule log was still burned, and a piece of it saved to light the next year's log. On Christmas morning something green, a leaf or the like, was brought into the house before anything was taken out."[9]
The Yule log is also attested as a custom present elsewhere in the English-speaking world, such as the United States. Robert Meyer, Jr. records in 1947 that a "Yule-Log Ceremony" in Palmer Lake, Colorado had occurred since 1934. He describes the custom: "It starts with the yule log [sic] hunt and is climaxed by drinking of wassail around the fire."[10] In the Southern United States before the end of the American Civil War, the Yule log was also maintained as a tradition. For example, according to scholar Allen Cabaniss:
Scholars have observed similarities between the Yule log and the folk custom of the ashen faggot, recorded solely in the West Country of England. First recorded at the beginning of the 19th century, the ashen faggot is burnt on Christmas Eve, is associated with a variety of folk beliefs, and is "made of smaller ash sticks bound into a faggot with strips of hazel, withy, or bramble".[12] G. R. Wiley observes that the ashen faggot may have developed out of the Yule log.[4]
The term "Yule log" is not the only term used to refer to the custom. It was commonly called a "Yule Clog" in north-east England, and it was also called the "Yule Block" in the Midlands and West Country and  "Gule Block" in Lincolnshire. In Cornwall, the term "Stock of the Mock" was found.[13]
In Wales it's called Boncyff Nadolig or Blocyn y Gwyliau (the Christmas Log or the Festival Block).[14]
In Scotland it's called Yeel Carline (the Christmas Old Wife).[14]
In Ireland it's called Bloc na Nollag (the Christmas Block).[14]
In Germany, where it’s called Christklotz, Christbrand, Christblock, Julklotz or Julblock it was customary, especially in Hesse and Westphalia, to burn the log slowly and then remove it and throw it back on the fire as protection from lightning.
The custom of burning a Yule log for one or more nights starting on Christmas Eve was also formerly widespread in France, where the usual term is bûche de noël. This may derive from a custom requiring peasants to bring a log to their lord. In Burgundy, gifts would be hidden under the log. Prayers were offered as the log was lighted in Brittany and in Provence, where the custom is still widely observed and called cacho fio (blessing of the log): the log, or branch from a fruit-bearing tree, is first paraded three times around the house by the grandfather of the family, then blessed with wine; it is often lighted together with the saved ashes of the previous year's log.[15][16] Other regional names include cosse de Nau in Berry, mouchon de Nau in Angoumois, chuquet in Normandy, souche in the Île de France, and tréfouiau in the Vendée.[17] The custom has now long been replaced by the eating of a log-shaped cake, also named Bûche de Noël.[18]
In Portugal, the Madeiros de Natal are big bonfires that are lit in the center of the village, in the main square or in the churchyard on Christmas Eve.
The remains of the log were preserved as they were believed to prevent damage usually caused by storms.
Galician people also have their local variant of this tradition known as tizón de Nadal [gl] or cepo de Nadal.
In Asturias the Nataliegu burns from December 24 until the new year in the fireplace of many houses and leaves sweet buns for the children. Then his ashes, which were attributed healing and protective powers for the home, were scattered around the house, the stables and other rooms.
In Basque Country Subilaro-egur also burns until the end of the year. The log gives life to good wishes, burns curses, prevents diseases and ensures good harvests.
It's also called eguberri, gabon, gabonzuzi, gabon-subil, gabon-mukur, olentzero-enbor, onontzoro-mokor, suklaro-egur, sukubela or porrondoko.
Olentzero it's a modern personification of the old log.
In High Aragon it's called tizón de Nadal. The children of the house are in charge of saying beautiful phrases, blessings and rituals (although in some places the blessing is done by the oldest or owner of the house). Sometimes the blessing is done after filling the log with a little wine while the blessing is said.
In the eastern areas in contact with Catalonia, the ritual has a more playful part, when the children of the house hit the log so it "shits" the presents, which are used to be jellies, candies, nuts and other things to eat or play.
Catalan People have a similar tradition, where Tió de Nadal is a magic log "fed" before Christmas. Singing children cover the tió with a blanket and beat him with sticks to make the tió defecate nougat candy and small gifts.
In Occitania the “cachafuòc” or “soc de Nadal” it's also one of the traditional elements that accompany and cheer up Christmas.
In Tuscany, especially in the Val di Chiana (province of Arezzo), it was customary to sing a  prayer during the "cerimonia del ceppo" (log ceremony)  Later, blindfolded children (later rewarded with sweets and other gifts), had to hit the log, while the rest of the family sang a particular song, called "Ave Maria del Ceppo".
In Lombardy, the head of the family used to sprinkle juniper on the log and place coins on it while reciting a prayer in the name of the Trinity. Then, wine was drunk at will and the remaining wine was thrown by the head of the family on the log; it was also customary, during the log ceremony, to cut three panettone and keep a piece for healing purposes for the whole following year.
In Montenegro, it was customary to put a piece of bread on the log and -similar to the Lombard custom- sprinkle it with wine.
Baltic people also have a similar ritual called "log pulling" (Latvian: bluķa vilkšana; Lithuanian: blukio vilkimo) where people in a village would drag a log (Latvian: bluķis; Lithuanian: blukis) or a tree stump through the village at the winter solstice and then at the end burn it.[19]
Serbian people have a similar tradition in which oak is burned.
As early as Jacob Grimm in the early 19th century, scholars have observed parallels between the South Slavic custom of the Badnjak and the Yule log tradition.[20] As observed by M. E. Durham (1940), the Badnjak is a sapling that is placed on the hearth on Christmas Eve. Varying customs involving the Badnjak may be performed, such as smearing it with fowl blood or goat blood and the ashes may be "strewn on the fields or garden to promote fertility on New Year's Eve".[21]
In Greece, the yule log was believed to drive away the kallikantzaroi, the evil monsters of local folklore, from one's home.
In the United States, a local New York television station first broadcast a six-minute loop of a yule log burning in a fireplace over the course of several hours. The broadcast, called simply Yule Log, premiered in full color on Dec. 24, 1966, at 9:30 p.m. on WPIX (Channel 11 in New York City) and became a yearly tradition. The original Yule Log footage was filmed on 16 millimeter film at Gracie Mansion, New York City's mayoral residence. New footage of a flaming yule log was shot in 1970, in a different location, producing a seven-minute loop on 35 millimeter film. The station still broadcasts the Yule Log for four to five hours every Christmas morning and, through the years, has had many imitators at television stations across the country.[22]


