34832,
110s,
The 110s was a decade that ran from January 1, AD 110, to December 31, AD 119.
In 114, the Roman Empire, ruled by Trajan, invaded Armenia; annexed it as a Roman province and killed Parthamasiris, who had been placed on the Armenian throne by his relative, the Parthia King Osroes I. In 115, the Roman Army overran northern Mesopotamia, commencing Trajan's Parthian campaign. The war was initially successful for the Romans, who, as a result, attained their greatest territorial extent. However, a series of setbacks, including wide-scale rebellions in the Eastern Mediterranean and North Africa and Trajan's death in 117, led to a Roman withdrawal. Trajan was succeeded by Hadrian, who withdrew from Mesopotamia and suppressed the Jewish revolt. Near the end of the decade, a rebellion in Roman Britain was suppressed. In 118, the Chinese Eastern Han dynasty suppressed a revolt by Qiang tribes which had erupted the prior decade.
An earthquake occurred in Antioch in 115, killing an estimated 260,000 people. The cities of Antioch, Daphne and Apamea were almost completely destroyed. Trees were uprooted and felled; people were thrown down to the ground.  It had an estimated magnitude of 7.5 on the surface wave magnitude scale and an estimated maximum intensity of XI (Extreme) on the Mercalli intensity scale. Antioch and surrounding areas were devastated with a great loss of life and property. It triggered a local tsunami that badly damaged the harbour at Caesarea Maritima. The Roman Emperor Trajan was caught in the earthquake, as was his successor Hadrian. Although the consul Marcus Pedo Vergilianus was killed, they escaped with only slight injuries and later began a program to rebuild the city.[1][2]
In architecture, the decade saw the construction of Trajan's Forum (the last of the Imperial fora to be constructed in ancient Rome), Trajan's Column (which commemorates the Roman victory in the Dacian Wars), the Arch of Trajan, and the Roman Pantheon. Around this time, Juvenal wrote Satires, a collection of satirical poems.
110
110
