37231,
13(number),
13 (thirteen) is the natural number following 12 and preceding 14.
Strikingly folkloric aspects of the number 13 have been noted in various cultures around the world: one theory is that this is due to the cultures employing lunar-solar calendars (there are approximately 12.41 lunations per solar year, and hence 12 "true months" plus a smaller, and often portentous, thirteenth month). This can be witnessed, for example, in the "Twelve Days of Christmas" of Western European tradition.[1]
The number 13 is the sixth prime number. It is a twin prime with 11, as well as a cousin prime with 17. It is the second Wilson prime, of three known (the others being 5 and 563),[2] and the smallest emirp in decimal.[3]
13 is:
Also,
In Germany, according to an old tradition, 13 (dreizehn), as the first compound number, was the first number written in digits; the numbers 0 (null) through 12 (zwölf) were spelled out. The Duden (the German standard dictionary) now calls this tradition (which was actually never written down as an official rule) outdated and no longer valid, but many writers still follow it.[11]
Thirteen is one of two numbers within the teen numerical range (13–19), along with fifteen, not derived by cardinal numeral (three) and the teen suffix; instead, it is derived from the ordinal numeral (third).
In Shia, 13 signifies the 13th day of the month of Rajab (the Lunar calendar), which is the birth of Imam Ali. 13 also is a total of 1 Prophet and 12 Shia Imams in the Islamic School of Thought.
The apparitions of the Virgin of Fátima in 1917 were claimed to occur on the 13th day of six consecutive months.[12]
In Catholic devotional practice, the number thirteen is also associated with Saint Anthony of Padua, since his feast day falls on June 13. A traditional devotion called the Thirteen Tuesdays of St. Anthony[13] involves praying to the saint every Tuesday over a period of thirteen weeks. Another devotion, St. Anthony's Chaplet, consists of thirteen decades of three beads each.[14]
According to famous Sakhi (Evidence) or story of Guru Nanak Dev Ji, when he was an accountant at a town of Sultanpur Lodhi, he was distributing groceries to people. When he gave groceries to the 13th person, he stopped because in Gurmukhi and Hindi the word 13 is called Terah, which means yours. And Guru Nanak Dev Ji kept saying, "Yours, yours, yours..." remembering God. People reported to the emperor that Guru Nanak Dev Ji was giving out free food to the people. When treasures were checked, there was more money than before.
The Vaisakhi, which commemorates the creation of "Khalsa" or pure Sikh is celebrated on April 13.
Since beginning of the Nowruz tradition, the 13th day of each new Iranian year is called Sizdah Be-dar, a festival dedicated to pranks and spending time outdoors.[15]
According to Aztec mythology, the Thirteen Heavens were formed by the gods from the head of Cipactli during creation.[16]
A common tradition in the religion Wicca holds that the number of members for a coven is ideally thirteen, though this tradition is not universal.[17]
The number 13 is considered an unlucky number in some countries.[18] The end of the Mayan calendar's 13th Baktun was superstitiously feared as a harbinger of the apocalyptic 2012 phenomenon.[19] Fear of the number 13 has a specifically recognized phobia, triskaidekaphobia, a word first recorded in 1911.[20] The superstitious sufferers of triskaidekaphobia try to avoid bad luck by keeping away from anything numbered or labelled thirteen. As a result, companies and manufacturers use another way of numbering or labelling to avoid the number, with hotels and tall buildings being conspicuous examples (thirteenth floor).[21] It is also considered unlucky to have thirteen guests at a table. Friday the 13th has been considered an unlucky day.[18]
There are a number of theories as to why the number thirteen became associated with bad luck, but none of them have been accepted as likely.[18]
In the Mayan Tzolk'in calendar, trecenas mark cycles of 13-day periods. The pyramids are also set up in 9 steps divided into 7 days and 6 nights, 13 days total.
In the standard 52-card deck of playing cards there are four suits, each of 13 ranks.
A baker's dozen, devil's dozen,[30] long dozen, or long measure is 13, one more than a standard dozen. The thirteenth loaf is called the vantage loaf because it is considered advantageous overall to get 13 loaves for the price of 12.[31]
In Arthurian legend, which was recorded in Medieval texts, King Arthur is resting in Avalon with the twelve greatest knights of the Round Table, totalling 13, and will return when his country is in peril.[32]
The Thirteen Treasures of Britain are a series of magical items listed in late Medieval texts.
The Thirteen Postures of Tai Chi are thirteen postures (consisting of Eight Gates and Five Steps) which are considered to be of fundamental importance in the practice of Tai Chi.[33]
In astronomy there are 13 star constellations in the zodiac (including Ophiuchus); this can be compared with astrology where there are 12 signs of the zodiac.
In Judaism, 13 signifies the age at which a boy matures and becomes a Bar Mitzvah, i.e., a full member of the Jewish faith (counts as a member of Minyan). The number of principles of Jewish faith according to Maimonides. According to Rabbinic commentary on the Torah, God has 13 Attributes of Mercy.
In a tarot card deck, XIII is the card of Death, usually picturing the Pale Horse with its rider.
Information box
{'Cardinal': 'thirteen', 'Ordinal': '13th\n(thirteenth)', 'Numeral system': 'tredecimal', 'Factorization': 'prime', 'Prime': '6th', 'Divisors': '1, 13', 'Greek numeral': 'ΙΓ´', 'Roman numeral': 'XIII', 'Binary': '11012', 'Ternary': '1113', 'Senary': '216', 'Octal': '158', 'Duodecimal': '1112', 'Hexadecimal': 'D16'}
