15352,
1948 Ashes 3rd test,
The Third Test of the 1948 Ashes series was one of five Tests in the Ashes cricket series between Australia and England. It was played at Old Trafford in Manchester from 8 to 13 July 1948. After a bouncer by Ray Lindwall bloodied his head, Denis Compton left the field but returned and helped England recover to 363 all out on the second afternoon. Compton and Alec Bedser were involved in a mix-up, running out the latter and ending a 121-run partnership. Dick Pollard hit Australian Sid Barnes (pictured) in the ribs with a pull shot, hospitalising him. After rain washed out the fourth day and the first half of the fifth day, the match was drawn, meaning that England could do no better than level the series. As Australia held the Ashes, they retained them. Even though 30% of the playing time was lost to rain, the match set a record for the highest attendance at a Test match in England at 133,740, surpassing the previous Test. (This article is part of a featured topic: Australian cricket team in England in 1948.)
July 8
Equisetum arvense, also known as the field horsetail or common horsetail, is a herbaceous perennial plant in the Equisetidae (horsetails) sub-class, native throughout the Arctic and temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere. It has separate sterile non-reproductive and fertile spore-bearing stems growing from a perennial underground rhizomatous stem system. The fertile stems are produced in early spring and are non-photosynthetic, while the green sterile stems start to grow after the fertile stems have wilted and persist through the summer until the first autumn frosts. This fertile spore-bearing E. arvense stem was photographed in Keila, Estonia.
Photograph credit: Ivar LeidusWikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects:
This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.
