734,
Actinopterygii,
Actinopterygii (/ˌæktɪnɒptəˈrɪdʒiaɪ/; from  actino- 'having rays', and Ancient Greek  πτέρυξ (ptérux) 'wing, fins'), members of which are known as ray-finned fishes, is a class of bony fish.[2] They comprise over 50% of living vertebrate species.[3]
The ray-finned fishes are so called because their fins are webs of skin supported by bony or horny spines (rays), as opposed to the fleshy, lobed fins that characterize the class Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fish). These actinopterygian fin rays attach directly to the proximal or basal skeletal elements, the radials, which represent the link or connection between these fins and the internal skeleton (e.g., pelvic and pectoral girdles).
By species count, actinopterygians dominate the vertebrates, and they constitute nearly 99% of the over 30,000 species of fish.[4] They are ubiquitous throughout freshwater and marine environments from the deep sea to the highest mountain streams. Extant species can range in size from Paedocypris, at 8 mm (0.3 in), to the massive ocean sunfish, at 2,300 kg (5,070 lb), and the long-bodied oarfish, at 11 m (36 ft). The vast majority of Actinopterygii (~99%) are teleosts.
Ray-finned fishes occur in many variant forms. The main features of  typical ray-finned fish are shown in the adjacent diagram. The swim bladder is a more derived structure than the lung.[5]
Ray-finned fishes have many different types of scales; but all teleosts have leptoid scales. The outer part of these scales fan out with bony ridges, while the inner part is crossed with fibrous connective tissue. Leptoid scales are thinner and more transparent than other types of scales, and lack the hardened enamel or dentine-like layers found in the scales of many other fish. Unlike ganoid scales, which are found in non-teleost actinopterygians, new scales are added in concentric layers as the fish grows.[6]
Ray-finned and lobe-finned fishes sometimes possesses lungs used for aerial respiration. Only bichirs retain ventrally budding lungs.[5]
Ray-finned fish vary in size and shape, in their feeding specializations, and in the number and arrangement of their ray-fins.
Tuna are streamlined for straight line speed with a deeply forked tail
The swordfish is even faster and more streamlined than the tuna
Salmon generate enough thrust with their tail fin to jump obstacles during river migrations
Cod have three dorsal and two anal fins, which give them great maneuverability
Flatfish have developed partially symmetric dorsal and pelvic fins
The four-eyed fish Anableps anableps can see both below and above the water surface
Lanternfish
Elongated bristlemouth
Fangtooth are indifferent swimmers who try to ambush their prey
The first spine of the dorsal fin of anglerfish is modified like a fishing rod with a lure
Alfonsino
Bichirs are the most basal living ray-fins; they possess lungs
Giant oarfish
European conger are ray-finned fish
Hawaiian turkeyfish
The benthic batfish Ogcocephalus notatus
The deep sea eel Saccopharynx ampullaceus
The freshwater elephant fish Campylomormyrus curvirostris
The sturgeon Acipenser oxyrhynchus has a cartilaginous endoskeleton
The ambush predator needlefish Belone belone
Seahorses are in the extended pipefish family
Mirror dory
Mahi-mahi
The "flying fish" Exocoetus obtusirostris has specialized pectoral fins for gliding
The hoodwinker sunfish Mola tecta has no caudal fin
The Jurassic †Leedsichthys was a filter-feeder and the largest ray-finned fish to have ever lived
Lactoria fornasini is a poisonous species of boxfish
Gars (along with the bowfin) are the only surviving members of the Holostei
In nearly all ray-finned fish, the sexes are separate, and in most species the females spawn eggs that are fertilized externally, typically with the male inseminating the eggs after they are laid. Development then proceeds with a free-swimming larval stage.[7] However other patterns of ontogeny exist, with one of the commonest being sequential hermaphroditism. In most cases this involves protogyny, fish starting life as females and converting to males at some stage, triggered by some internal or external factor. Protandry, where a fish converts from male to female, is much less common than protogyny.[8]
Most families use external rather than internal fertilization.[9] Of the oviparous teleosts, most (79%) do not provide parental care.[10] Viviparity, ovoviviparity, or some form of parental care for eggs, whether by the male, the female, or both parents is seen in a significant fraction (21%) of the 422 teleost families; no care is likely the ancestral condition.[10] The oldest case of viviparity in ray-finned fish is found in Middle Triassic species of †Saurichthys.[11] Viviparity is relatively rare and is found in about 6% of living teleost species; male care is far more common than female care.[10][12] Male territoriality "preadapts" a species for evolving male parental care.[13][14]
There are a few examples of fish that self-fertilise. The mangrove rivulus is an amphibious, simultaneous hermaphrodite, producing both eggs and spawn and having internal fertilisation. This mode of reproduction may be related to the fish's habit of spending long periods out of water in the mangrove forests it inhabits. Males are occasionally produced at temperatures below 19 °C (66 °F) and can fertilise eggs that are then spawned by the female. This maintains genetic variability in a species that is otherwise highly inbred.[15]
Actinopterygii is divided into the classes Cladistia and Actinopteri. The latter comprises the subclasses Chondrostei and Neopterygii. The Neopterygii, in turn, is divided into the infraclasses Holostei and Teleostei. During the Mesozoic (Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous) and Cenozoic the teleosts in particular diversified widely. As a result, 96% of living fish species are teleosts (40% of all fish species belong to the teleost subgroup Acanthomorpha), while all other groups of actinopterygians represent depauperate lineages.[16]
The classification of ray-finned fishes can be summarized as follows:
The cladogram below shows the main clades of living actinopterygians and their evolutionary relationships to other extant groups of fishes and the four-limbed vertebrates (tetrapods).[17][18] The latter include mostly terrestrial species but also groups that became secondarily aquatic (e.g. Whales and Dolphins). Tetrapods evolved from a group of bony fish during the Devonian period.[19] Approximate divergence dates for the different actinopterygian clades (in millions of years, mya) are from Near et al., 2012.[17]
Sauropsids (reptiles, birds) 
Mammals 
Amphibians 
Lungfish 
Coelacanths 
Polypteriformes (bichirs, reedfishes) 
Acipenseriformes (sturgeons, paddlefishes) 
Lepisosteiformes (gars) 
Amiiformes (bowfins) 
Teleostei 
Cartilaginous fishes (sharks, rays, ratfish) 
Jaw-less fishes (hagfish, lampreys) 
The polypterids (bichirs and reedfish) are the sister lineage of all other actinopterygians, the Acipenseriformes (sturgeons and paddlefishes) are the sister lineage of Neopterygii, and Holostei (bowfin and gars) are the sister lineage of teleosts. The Elopomorpha (eels and tarpons) appear to be the most basal teleosts.[17]
The earliest known fossil actinopterygian is Andreolepis hedei, dating back 420 million years (Late Silurian), remains of which have been found in Russia, Sweden, and Estonia.[20] Crown group actinopterygians most likely originated near the Devonian-Carboniferous boundary.[21] The earliest fossil relatives of modern teleosts are from the Triassic period (Prohalecites, Pholidophorus),[22][23] although it is suspected that teleosts originated already during the Paleozoic Era.[17]
The listing below is a summary of all extinct (indicated by a dagger, †) and living groups of Actinopterygii with their respective taxonomic rank. The taxonomy follows Phylogenetic Classification of Bony Fishes[18][26] with notes when this differs from Nelson,[3] ITIS[27] and FishBase[28] and extinct groups from Van der Laan 2016[29] and Xu 2021.[30]
