2448,
ActionAgainstHunger,
Action Against Hunger (French: Action Contre La Faim - ACF) is a global humanitarian organization which originated in France and is committed to ending world hunger. The organization helps malnourished children and provides communities with access to safe water and sustainable solutions to hunger.
In 2020, Action Against Hunger worked in 51 countries around the world with more than 8,300 employees and volunteers helping 13.6 million people in need.[1][2]
Action Against Hunger was established in 1979 by a group of French doctors, scientists, and writers. Nobel Prize-winning physicist Alfred Kastler served as the organization's first chairman. Currently, Mumbai-based businessman and philanthropist Ashwini Kakkar serves as International President of Action Against Hunger network.[3]
The group initially provided assistance to Afghan refugees in Pakistan, famine-stricken Ugandan communities, and Cambodian refugees in Thailand. It expanded to address additional humanitarian concerns in Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, the Balkans, and elsewhere during the 1980s and 1990s. Action Against Hunger's Scientific Committee pioneered the therapeutic milk formula (F100), now used by all major humanitarian aid organizations to treat acute malnutrition. Early results showed that treatment with F100 has the capacity to reduce the mortality rate of severely malnourished children to below 5%, with a median hospital fatality rate quoted of 23.5%[4] A few years later, the therapeutic milk was repackaged as ready-to-use therapeutic foods (RUTFs), a peanut-based paste packaged like a power bar. These bars allow for the treatment of malnutrition at home and do not require any preparation or refrigeration.
The international network currently has headquarters in six countries – France, Spain, the United States, Canada, Italy, the UK. Its four main areas of work include nutrition, food security, water and sanitation, and advocacy.[5]
The integrated approaches with various sectors of intervention are:
In 2022, Action Against Hunger USA is leading a USAID-funded project to address health and nutrition challenges associated with policy, advocacy, financing, and governance in communities around the world, and will work in partnership with leading organizations such as Pathfinder International, Amref Health Africa, Global Communities, Humanity & Inclusion, Kupenda for the Children, and Results for Development.[6]
Action Against Hunger partners with leaders from the food and beverage industry to bring attention to global hunger. Each year, several campaigns are run by the network to raise funds and support the organisation's programs : Restaurants Against Hunger and Love Food Give Food.[7][8]
In 2019, Action Against Hunger International Network is present in 51 countries:[9]
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Uganda, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Soudan, Tanzania, Chad, Zimbabwe
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, South Caucasus
Haïti
Turkey, Ukraine
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Palestinian Occupied Territories, Yemen, Jordan, Iraq
Colombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Honduras
Since 1995 Action Against Hunger developed an international network to have a bigger global impact.
The Network has 6 headquarters in the world: France, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada and Italy.
Action Against Hunger has also a West Africa Regional Office (WARO) located in Dakar, a training centre in Nairobi, and five logistic platforms (Lyon, Paris, Barcelona, Dubai, Panama).
This network increases the human and financial capacities and enables specialisation per headquarter.
2006 Trincomalee massacre of NGO workers
Information box
{'Formation': '1979', 'Type': 'Non-profit', 'Purpose': 'To end child hunger whilst providing communities with access to safe water and amazing solutions to hunger.', 'Headquarters': 'New York, USA; Toronto, Canada; London, UK; Paris, France; Madrid, Spain; Mumbai, India; Milan, Italy', 'Region served': 'Over 51 countries around the world', 'Staff': 'Over 7000', 'Website': 'www.actioncontrelafaim.org (FR) www.actionagainsthunger.org (US) www.actionagainsthunger.org.uk (UK) www.actioncontrelafaim.ca (CA) www.accioncontraelhambre.org (ES) www.actionagainsthunger.in (IN) www.azionecontrolafame.it (IT)'}
