39761,
Adnams,
Adnams is a regional brewery founded in 1872 in Southwold, Suffolk, England, by George and Ernest Adnams. It produces cask ale and bottled beers. Annual production is around 85,000 barrels.
In 2010, the company established the Copper House distillery for the production of gin, vodka and whisky.
The earliest recorded brewing on the Adnams site was in 1396 by Johanna de Corby.[1]
The Sole Bay Brewery in Southwold was purchased in 1872 by George and Ernest Adnams. The company was incorporated in 1890, and has remained independent since then, producing a range of beers for distribution mainly in East Anglia.  The Adnams family was joined in 1902 by Pierse Loftus, who brought strategic vision, technical expertise and sound financial principles, building the base on which succeeding generations have been able to build. Adnams is now a PLC, with numerous shareholders, but still has family representation on the board, with Jonathan Adnams as chairman.
The yeast used by Adnams was sourced from Morgans brewery of Norwich in 1942.
Until 1953 and from 1970 to 2006, casks of Adnams ale were delivered to the six pubs of Southwold by horse and dray; the tradition ended when a new distribution depot was built three miles from the brewery.[2]
The company founded a charity, The Adnams Charity,[3] in 1990 to celebrate its centenary as a public company. A percentage of the company's annual profits is used to support worthwhile causes within a 25-mile radius of Southwold.
In 1993, Adnams Extra won the Champion Beer of Britain, an award presented by the Campaign for Real Ale at the annual Great British Beer Festival.  Adnams remains committed to brewing cask ale and operating non-themed pubs.[citation needed]  Cask ale is available in all its 70 pubs, and it supplies more than 1000 other outlets direct.[citation needed]  New fermenting vessels were installed in March 2001 to cope with demand, and the brewhouse was completely re-equipped in July 2006, making it one of the most energy efficient in Europe.[citation needed]
At the beginning of 2004, Adnams purchased land in neighbouring village of Reydon to expand its business with a new distribution centre, designed by architect Jeremy Blake, which was nominated for the 2007 RICS East of England Award for Sustainability.[4] Adnams was awarded a Queen's Award for Enterprise in the sustainable development category in 2005.[5]
The distribution centre features the UK's largest living roof known as the Sky Garden which is made up of a variety of sedum species. Not only does this help to insulate the building, but the water stored in the sedum plants is also harvested and used to flush the staff toilets and clean company vehicles.[6] This, combined with the solar panels and the environmental construction have meant the energy bills have been cut by half.[7]
In June 2009, Adnams signed a five-year agreement to supply Ipswich Town FC with beers at their Portman Road stadium, replacing the 14-year-old association with Greene King.[citation needed]
In 2010 Carl's Copper Pot still and Rectifying columns were installed and put in operation in November of that same year for the production of Gin, Vodka & Whisky.
In early 2019, Adnams launched a new English cider called Wild Wave.
Adnams produce regular cask ale, seasonal beer, bottled beer, "international" beer and "commemorative" beers and cider :[8]
From time to time, Adnams produce limited brews of specialty beers, either in the styles of non-UK beers, or using special international ingredients. These beers are usually available only from selected outlets. Past and current international beers have included:[citation needed]
Adnams have a long history of producing limited and one-off special beers to commemorate events of local or national importance.[citation needed] These are generally available for a limited period in bottles, and in cask at a few selected outlets. Recent beers include:-
The company branched out to distilling when they installed an 800-litre copper pot still with 42 plated rectifying columns, they acquired from Carl in 2010.[16]
The capacity was expanded in 2015 with two extra pot stills.
[17]
The product line holds a wide variety of gin, vodka and whisky. 
The whisky range consists of three whiskies each with different mash-bills: a single malt of 100% malted barley: a rye whisky of 75% rye and 25% malted barley; and a "triple malt" of 60% malted barley, 35% wheat, and 5% oats.[18]
Some less common products of the distiller are a Bierbrand Spirit of Broadside, two absinthe expressions: Verte & Rouge, and non-grain products like brandy made from locally grown grapes.[19]
Information box
{'Type': 'Publicly-traded', 'Location': 'Southwold, Suffolk, England', 'Coordinates': '52°19′38″N 1°40′47″E', 'Opened': '1872', 'Key people': 'George and Ernest Adnams, Jonathan Adnams, Dr Andy Wood', 'Annual production volume': '85,000 imperial barrels (139,000 hL)', 'Website': 'adnams.co.uk'}
