2826,
Antigoniddynasty,
The Antigonid dynasty (/ænˈtɪɡoʊnɪd/; Greek: Ἀντιγονίδαι) was a Hellenistic dynasty of Dorian Greek provenance,[2] descended from Alexander the Great's general Antigonus I Monophthalmus ("the One-Eyed") that ruled mainly in Macedonia.
In 309 BC, Cassander commanded Glaucias to secretly assassinate the 14-year-old Alexander IV of Macedon and his mother. The Macedonian Argead dynasty became extinct. In 306 BC, after defeating Ptolemy at the naval Battle of Salamis, Demetrius I conquered Cyprus. Following that victory Antigonus I assumed the title of Basileus (King of Alexander's Empire) and bestowed the same upon his son. Antigonus I ruled mostly over Asia Minor and northern Syria. His attempts to take control of the whole of Alexander's empire led to his defeat and death at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC. Antigonus's son Demetrius I Poliorcetes survived the battle, and managed to seize control of Macedon itself a few years later, but eventually lost his throne, dying as a prisoner of Seleucus I Nicator. After a period of confusion, Demetrius's son Antigonus II Gonatas was able to establish the family's control over the old Kingdom of Macedon, as well as over most of the Greek city-states, by 276 BC.[3]
It was one of four dynasties established by Alexander's successors, the others being the Seleucid dynasty, Ptolemaic dynasty and Antipatrid dynasty. The last scion of the dynasty, Perseus of Macedon, who reigned between 179 and 168 BC, proved unable to stop the advancing Roman legions and Macedon's defeat at the Battle of Pydna signaled the end of the dynasty.[4]
The ruling members of the Antigonid dynasty were:
"Monophthalmus" is Greek for "One-eyed," a reference to a disfiguring battle scar. 
The Greek rebel against Rome and last King of Macedonia, Andriscus, claimed to be the son of Perseus.
Coin of Antigonus I Monophthalmus ("the One-eyed") (382–301 BC).
Coin of Demetrius I of Macedon ("The Besieger"), (337–283 BC), son of Antigonus I Monophthalmus
Coin of Antigonus II Gonatas
Coin of Philip VI Andriscus. Greek inscription reads ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΟΥ (King Philip).
Information box
{'Capital': 'Antigonia (Antigonus I)\nDemetrias (Demetrius I)\nPella (since Antigonus II)', 'Common languages': 'Greek', 'Religion': 'Ancient Greek / Hellenistic', 'Government': 'Hellenistic monarchy', 'King': ' ', '• 306 BC – 301 BC': 'Antigonus I Monophthalmus', '• 179 BC – 168 BC': 'Perseus of Macedon', 'Historical era': 'Hellenistic', '• Established': '306 BC', '• Defeat by Rome': '168 BC'}
