7125,
Center(grouptheory),
In abstract algebra, the center of a group, G, is the set of elements that commute with every element of G. It is denoted Z(G), from German Zentrum, meaning center. In set-builder notation,
The center is a normal subgroup, Z(G) ⊲ G.  As a subgroup, it is always characteristic, but is not necessarily fully characteristic.  The quotient group, G / Z(G), is isomorphic to the inner automorphism group, Inn(G).
A group G is abelian if and only if Z(G) = G.  At the other extreme, a group is said to be centerless if Z(G) is trivial; i.e., consists only of the identity element.
The elements of the center are sometimes called central.
The center of G is always a subgroup of G.  In particular:
Furthermore, the center of G is always an abelian and normal subgroup of G. Since all elements of Z(G) commute, it is closed under conjugation.
Note that a homomorphism f: G → H between groups generally does not restrict to a homomorphism between their centers.  Although f (Z (G)) commutes with f ( G ), unless f is surjective f (Z (G)) need not commute with all of H and therefore need not be a subset of Z ( H ).  Put another way, there is no "center" functor between categories Grp and Ab.  Even though we can map objects, we cannot map arrows.
By definition, the center is the set of elements for which the conjugacy class of each element is the element itself; i.e., Cl(g) = {g}.
The center is also the intersection of all the centralizers of each element of G. As centralizers are subgroups, this again shows that the center is a subgroup.  
Consider the map, f: G → Aut(G), from G to the automorphism group of G defined by f(g) = ϕg, where ϕg is the automorphism of G defined by 
The function, f is a group homomorphism, and its kernel is precisely the center of G, and its image is called the inner automorphism group of G, denoted Inn(G). By the first isomorphism theorem we get,
The cokernel of this map is the group Out(G) of outer automorphisms, and these form the exact sequence
Quotienting out by the center of a group yields a sequence of groups called the upper central series:
The kernel of the map G → Gi is the ith center[1] of G (second center, third center, etc.) and is denoted Zi(G).[2] Concretely, the (i + 1)-st center are the terms that commute with all elements up to an element of the ith center. Following this definition, one can define the 0th center of a group to be the identity subgroup. This can be continued to transfinite ordinals by transfinite induction; the union of all the higher centers is called the hypercenter.[note 1]
The ascending chain of subgroups
stabilizes at i (equivalently, Zi(G) = Zi+1(G)) if and only if Gi is centerless.
