13403,
ForeignrelationsofHonduras,
Honduras is a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), the Central American Integration System (SICA), and the Central American Security Commission (CASQ). During 1995-96, Honduras, a founding member of the United Nations, for the first time served as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. Honduras is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98).
President Flores[who?] consulted frequently with the other Central American presidents on issues of mutual interest. He continued his predecessor's strong emphasis on Central American cooperation and integration, which resulted in an agreement easing border controls and tariffs among Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. Honduras also joined its six Central American neighbors at the 1994 Summit of the Americas in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development, known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA, or CONCAUSA, to promote sustainable economic development in the region. Honduras held the 6-month SICA presidency during the second half of 1998.
At the 17th Central American Summit in 1995, hosted by Honduras in the northern city of San Pedro Sula, the region's six countries (excluding Belize) signed treaties creating confidence- and security-building measures and combating the smuggling of stolen automobiles in the isthmus. In subsequent summits (held every 6 months), Honduras has continued to work with the other Central American countries on issues of common concern.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 16 September 2011. 
The two countries established diplomatic relations on June 4, 2014[3] during the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in Asunción.
In 1969, El Salvador and Honduras fought the brief "Football War" over disputed border areas and friction resulting from the 300,000 Salvadorans who had emigrated to Honduras in search of land and employment. The catalyst was nationalistic feelings aroused by a series of soccer matches between the two countries. The two countries formally signed a peace treaty on October 30, 1980, which put the border dispute before the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
In September 1992, the court awarded most of the disputed territory to Honduras. In January 1998, Honduras and El Salvador signed a border demarcation treaty that will implement the terms of the ICJ decree. The treaty awaits legal ratification in both countries. Honduras and El Salvador maintain normal diplomatic and trade relations.
In July 2011, President Lobo announced that Honduras would recognise the State of Palestine and support its admission to the General Assembly in September.[5] This broke with the traditional policy of Honduras, which was to encourage a settlement reached through negotiations.[6] After the decision was publicised, Israel withheld its ambassador to Honduras and made a formal protest with the Honduran embassy in Tel Aviv.[7] In response, Lobo defended his intention "from a moral point of view".[8]
Palestinian Foreign Minister Riyad al-Maliki claimed that official recognition would be announced by the Honduran Foreign Ministry on 20 August following the summit of the Central American Integration System (SICA) on 18 August.[9] According to Lobo, the organisation was expected to adopt a co-ordinated position on the issue,[8] but El Salvador, the nation presiding over the summit, refused to include the matter on the official agenda, insisting that discussion should retain a regional focus.[10] Despite this, Honduras and El Salvador both officially recognised the Palestinian state on 26 August.[11][12]
In December 2017, Honduras was one of nine countries (including the United States and Israel) to support Israel and vote against a motion adopted by the United Nations General Assembly condemning the United States' recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.[13][14]
In February 2021, the first COVID vaccines in the country were received through a donation from Israel.[15]
In June 2021, Honduras moved its embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, being the fourth country to move its embassy to Jerusalem. (The other countries are the United States, Guatemala, and Kosovo.)[16]
Honduras officially recognized the Republic of Kosovo on 3 September 2010.[17] Kosovo and Honduras established diplomatic relations on 2 December 2010.[18]
Diplomatic relations between both nations began in 1879.
Honduras and Nicaragua had tense relations throughout 2000 and early 2001 due to a boundary dispute off the Atlantic coast. Nicaragua imposed a 35% tariff against Honduras due to the dispute, and the matter is currently awaiting a decision from the ICJ.[22]
Diplomatic relations between the USSR and Honduras started on 30 September 1990. After the breakup of the Soviet Union, Honduras recognized Russia as the USSR's successor on January 3, 1992. In 1993 in both countries ambassadors accredited in combination - Ambassador of the Russian Federation, Ambassador of Nicaragua, and of Honduras in Moscow. In 1995, Honorary Consulate of Russia was built in Honduras and was appointed a major entrepreneur Fredy Antonio Nasser Selman. It supports inter-parliamentary ties.
In 1988 and 1991 in Moscow, the delegation visited the National Congress of Honduras. In 1989 he traveled to Honduras. In late September 1996 a visit to the country the delegation of the Federation Council of Federal Assembly of Russian Federation headed by Moscow Gordumy VM Platonov. To date, the Russian-Honduran context, has achieved some progress. It is a political dialogue on pressing international issues, Central American contacts at the United Nations.
The establishment of diplomatic relations between Honduras and the Republic of Korea was on 1 April 1962.[23]
In May 1997, former President Carlos Roberto Reina met with former US President Bill Clinton in Costa Rica, and the President of the Dominican Republic to reaffirm support for strengthening democracy, good governance, and promoting prosperity through economic integration, free trade, and investment. The leaders also expressed their commitment to the continued development of just and equitable societies and responsible environmental policies as an integral element of sustainable development.
In Summer 2003 Honduras sent around 370 soldiers to Iraq as part of the U.S. coalition of countries that were engaging in war in this country. Immediately after 21 April 2004 these troops were withdrawn by President Ricardo Maduro in the wake of a similar decision by Spanish prime minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero. Honduras joining the coalition was largely an attempt to improve foreign relations with the United States over the issue of the migration of many thousands of Hondurans to the US. The money these migrants send back to their families in Honduras is a crucial factor in the Honduran economy, while any political strategy to help these migrants is a guaranteed vote winner.
Honduras is a transshipment point for drugs and narcotics; illicit producer of cannabis, cultivated on small plots and used principally for local consumption; corruption is a major problem.
Parts of this article are based on text from the CIA World Factbook.


