3481,
ForeignrelationsoftheBahamas,
The Bahamas has a strong bilateral relationship with the United Kingdom, represented by a High Commissioner in London. The Bahamas also associates closely with other nations of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The Bahamas became a member of the Organization of American States (OAS) in 1956 and the United Nations (UN) in 1973.
The Bahamas has been an independent Commonwealth realm since 1973, with Charles III as King of The Bahamas. The King is represented locally by the Governor-General of the Bahamas.
List of countries which The Bahamas maintains diplomatic relations with:
A repatriation agreement was signed with Cuba in 1996, and there are commercial and cultural contacts between the two countries.
Prime Minister Hubert Minnis visited Port-au-Prince to discuss stemming illegal immigration from Haiti and a trade deal selling Haitian agricultural products to the Bahamas.
The two countries signed accords on diplomatic relations on January 14, 2004. Since both countries have signed a joint communiqué, Sergey Lavrov states that the Bahamas and Russia decided to sign diplomatic missions on the ambassadorial level. Both countries are members of the United Nations. Russia is represented in the Bahamas through its consulate-general in New York City.
The two countries have good relations.[94]
The Bahamas and the United States historically have had close economic and commercial relations. The countries share ethnic and cultural ties, especially in education; The Bahamas is home to approximately 30,000 American residents. In addition, there are about 110 U.S.-related businesses in The Bahamas and, in 2005, 87% of the 5 million tourists visiting The Bahamas were American.
As a neighbour, The Bahamas and its political stability are especially important to the United States. The U.S. and the Bahamian governments have worked together on reducing crime and addressing migration issues. With the closest island only 45 miles from the coast of Florida, The Bahamas often is used as a gateway for drugs and illegal aliens bound for the United States. The United States and The Bahamas cooperate closely to handle these threats.
U.S. assistance and resources have been essential to Bahamian efforts to mitigate the persistent flow of illegal narcotics and migrants through the archipelago. The United States and The Bahamas also actively cooperate on law enforcement, civil aviation, marine research, meteorology, and agricultural issues. The U.S. Navy operates an underwater research facility on Andros Island.
The Department of Homeland Security's Bureau of Customs and Border Protection maintains "preclearance" facilities at the airports in Nassau and Freeport. Travelers to the U.S. are interviewed and inspected before departure, allowing faster connection times in the U.S.
The Bahamas holds memberships in a number of international organizations: the UN and some specialized and related agencies, including the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Labour Organization (ILO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), International Telecommunication Union (ITU), World Bank, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and World Health Organization (WHO); the OAS and related agencies, including the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), and Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO); the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), excluding its Caribbean Single Market and Economy; the International Criminal Police Organization - Interpol; the Universal Postal Union (UPU); the International Maritime Organization (IMO); and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
^These three form the SSS islands that with the ABC islands comprise the Dutch Caribbean, of which *the BES islands are not direct Kingdom constituents but subsumed with the country of the Netherlands.
†Physiographically, these continental islands are not part of the volcanic Windward Islands arc, although sometimes grouped with them culturally and politically.
ǂDisputed territories administered by Guyana. ~Disputed territories administered by Colombia.


