3684,
ForeignrelationsofBurkinaFaso,

Burkina Faso has good relations with the European Union,[1] African[2] and certain Asian countries. France, the former colonial power, in particular, continues to provide significant aid and supports Compaoré's developing role as a regional powerbroker.
According to the U.S. State Department, "U.S. relations with Burkina Faso are good but subject to strains in the past because of the Compaoré government's past involvement in arms trading and other sanctions-breaking activity."[3] Burkina Faso cut diplomatic ties with Taiwan in May 2018 (being the most populous state to do so in the 21st century) and the foreign ministry of China stated it approved of its decision.[4][5]
Burkina Faso's relations with its West African neighbors have improved in recent years.[6] Relations with Ghana, in particular, have warmed.[7] President Compaoré had mediated a political crisis in Togo and helped to resolve the Tuareg conflict in Niger.[citation needed] Burkina maintains cordial relations with Libya, but recalled its in ambassador in 2017 over issues of treatment of migrants trying to reach Europe, and the reemergence of the slave trade there.[8] A territorial dispute with Mali was mediated by Ghana and Nigeria, which has led to lessening of tensions between the two nations.[9]
Nineteen provinces of Burkina Faso are joined with contiguous areas of Mali and Niger under the Liptako-Gourma Authority, a regional economic organization.[10]
Burkina Faso is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a bilateral immunity agreement of protection for the United States-military (as covered under Article 98).[11]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 25 November 1992.
In September 2007, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) intervened to attempt to resolve the dispute over two villages along the Benin–Burkina Faso border that remain from a 2005 ICJ decision. 
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 15 September 1973.[26] On February 2, 1994, Burkina Faso signed a communique to resume diplomatic relations with Taiwan. On February 4, the Chinese government announced the suspension of diplomatic relations with Burkina Faso. A communique on the re-establishment of diplomatic relations was signed on 26 May 2018.[citation needed]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 13 June 2001[30]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 4 August 1960[35]
Present day Burkina Faso was formerly part of a French colony called French Upper Volta. France has special forces stationed in Burkina Faso.[36]
In January 2023, Burkina Faso's military junta asked France to recall its ambassador amid a surge of anti-French sentiment as the country moved to develop closer ties to Russia[36]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 2 October 2012[39]
With the coming to power of Thomas Sankara in Burkina Faso in 1983, relations between Ghana and Burkina became both warm and close. Indeed, Rawlings and Sankara began discussions about uniting Ghana and Burkina in the manner of the defunct Ghana-Guinea-Mali Union, which Nkrumah had sought unsuccessfully to promote as a foundation for his dream of unified continental government. Political and economic ties between Ghana and Burkina, a poorer country, were strengthened through joint commissions of cooperation and through border demarcation committee meetings. Frequent high-level consultations and joint military exercises, meant to discourage potential dissidents and to protect young "revolutions" in each country, were fairly regular features of Ghana-Burkina relations.[40]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 23 September 1987[42]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 23 October 2001[44]
Burkina Faso is represented in Iceland by its embassy in Copenhagen, Denmark.[45]
Both countries established diplomatiuc relations on 23 March 1962[46]
India and Burkina Faso enjoy warm relations.
Although Burkina Faso operates a consulate in Tel Aviv, Israel has no diplomatic nor consular presence in Burkina Faso.[49]
The Israeli ambassador to Côte d'Ivoire Dr. Eliyahu Ben-Tura is accredited as the non-resident Ambassador to Burkina Faso (as well as Benin and Togo).[50]
When Thomas Sankara came to power in 1983 relations between Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast became hostile as Félix Houphouët-Boigny was threatened by Sankara's revolutionary regime. That was one of the main reasons why Blaise Compaore launched his coup in 1987 killing Sankara and making himself president. Under Blaise Compaore Ivory Coast and Burkina Faso reestablished good relations and both countries supported Charles Taylor's NPFL in their overthrow of Samuel Doe. They remain allies and are active trading partners.
Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1960.[53]
Burkina Faso recognised the Republic of Kosovo on April 24, 2008.[54] Burkina Faso and Kosovo established diplomatic relations on December 6, 2012.[55] Both countries enjoy excellent relationships.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 8 February 2008[61]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 11 October 1972[73]
Diplomatic relations between Burkina Faso and the Soviet Union were established for the first time on February 18, 1967.[80] After the breakup of the Soviet Union, Burkina Faso recognized Russia as the USSR's successor. However financial reasons has shut the embassies between the two nations. In 1992, the embassy of the Russian Federation in Ouagadougou was closed, and in 1996, the embassy of Burkina Faso in Moscow was closed. Burkina Faso has since re-opened its embassy in Moscow.[81]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 20 April 1962[87]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 27 November 1964[88]
Sweden is a major contributor of developmental aid to Burkina Faso. The Burkina Faso–Sweden Friendship Association was formed in 1986 to promote exchange between the two countries.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 6 April 1970[92]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 5 August 1960[97]
Relations are good but subject to strains in the past because of the Compaoré government's past involvement in arms trading and other sanctions-breaking activity. In addition to regional peace and stability, U.S. interests in Burkina are to promote continued democratization and greater respect for human rights and to encourage sustainable economic development. Although the Agency for International Development (USAID) closed its office in Ouagadougou in 1995, about $18 million annually of USAID funding goes to Burkina's development through non-governmental and regional organizations. The largest is a Food for Peace school lunch program administered by Catholic Relief Services. Burkina has been the site of several development success stories. U.S. leadership in building food security in the Sahel after the 1968–74 drought has been successful in virtually eliminating famine, despite recurrent drought years. River blindness has been eliminated from the region. In both cases, the U.S. was the main donor to inter-African organizations headquartered in Ouagadougou which through sustained efforts have achieved and consolidated these gains. In 2005, Burkina Faso and the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) signed a $12 million Threshold Country Program to build schools and increase girls' enrollment rates. In November 2005, the Millennium Challenge Corporation selected Burkina Faso as eligible to submit a proposal for Millennium Challenge Account assistance for fiscal year 2006, making it one of only two countries eligible for threshold as well as compact funding. The Government of Burkina Faso is working closely with MCC staff to finalize its compact submission.


