27336,
ForeignrelationsofSlovakia,

Slovak Republic has been a member of European Union since 2004. Slovakia has been an active participant in U.S.- and NATO-led military actions. There is a joint Czech-Slovak peacekeeping force in Kosovo. After the September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack on the United States, the government opened its airspace to coalition planes. In June 2002, Slovakia announced that they would send an engineering brigade to Afghanistan.
Slovak Republic is a member of the United Nations and participates in its specialized agencies. It is a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the OECD. It also is part of the Visegrád Group (Slovakia, Hungary, Czech Republic, and Poland), a forum for discussing areas of common concern. Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic entered into a Customs Union upon the division of Czechoslovakia in 1993, which facilitates a relatively free flow of goods and services. Slovak Republic maintains diplomatic relations with 134 countries, primarily through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There are 44 embassies and 35 honorary consulates in Bratislava.
Liechtenstein claims restitution of land in Slovakia confiscated from its princely family in 1918[1] by the then newly established state of Czechoslovakia, the predecessor of the Slovak Republic. The Slovak Republic insists that the power to claim restitution does not go back before February 1948, when the Communists seized power. Slovakia and Liechtenstein established diplomatic relations on 9 December 2009.[2]
Bilateral government, legal, technical and economic working group negotiations continued in 2006 between Slovakia and Hungary over Hungary's completion of its portion of the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros hydroelectric dam project along the Danube.[3]
In July 2022 after the Russian invasion of Ukraine the Prime Minister of Slovakia Eduard Heger made it known that he had entered discussions with the Czech Republic over the protection of Slovak airspace by Czech warplanes in the event that the Slovaks were to donate to the Ukraine the remnants of the Slovak MiG-29 fighter jet fleet, in advance of the fleet's replacement and renewal (at the earliest in 2023) by American F-16 warplanes.[4] The transaction would also include the remnants of Slovakia's Soviet-era T-72 tanks.[4] Czech PM Peter Fiala agreed with this initiative,[5][6] which had been proposed by Ukrainian President Zelensky.[4] The transaction was set to occur in September 2022.[7]
In June 2020, Slovakia openly opposed the Hong Kong national security law.[8]
List of countries with which Slovakia maintains diplomatic relations with:
Slovakia is accredited to Belize from its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico.[14]
Slovakia is accredited to Dominica from its embassy in Havana, Cuba.[14][16]
In November 2017, Slovak President Andrej Kiska paid an official visit to Mexico.[17]
See Slovakia–United States relations
Since August 1995 India has an embassy in Bratislava and Slovakia has an embassy in New Delhi.[23]
The Slovak Government welcomed and appreciated the opening of the Embassy of India, Bratislava (one of 32 resident missions) in August 1995, which was agreed during the former PM Moravcik's visit to India and considered it as a further indication of India's interest in enhancing relations with Slovakia.[24]
Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1993. Israel has an embassy in Bratislava.[25]
The establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of Korea and the Slovak Republic began on 22 March 1990. 
The multi-national Communist armed forces' sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. All member countries, with the exception of the People's Republic of Albania and the Socialist Republic of Romania participated in the invasion. Albania formally withdrew form the Warsaw Pact in 1968 over the matter.[30]
Between 1918 and 1 January 1993, both countries were part of Czechoslovakia. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 1 January 1993. 
Both countries established diplomatic relations in 1993 but previously had relations during World War II when Slovakia was a separate state. Germany has an embassy in Bratislava. Slovakia has an embassy in Berlin, an embassy branch in Bonn, a general consulate in Munich. Germany plays an important part in the Slovak economy as it is Slovakia's main trading partner. 
Luxembourg is represented in Slovakia through its embassy in Prague, Czech Republic.  Slovakia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and an honorary consulate in Luxembourg-City. 
Malta is represented in Slovakia through a non-resident ambassador based in Valletta (in the Foreign Ministry).  Slovakia is represented in Malta through its embassy in Rome (Italy) and an honorary consulate in Valletta. 


