9395,
ForeignrelationsofEstonia,

The Republic of Estonia gained its independence from the Russian Empire on 24 February 1918 and established diplomatic relations with many countries via membership of the League of Nations. The forcible incorporation of Estonia into the Soviet Union in 1940 was not generally recognised by the international community and the Estonian diplomatic service continued to operate in some countries. Following the restoration of independence from the Soviet Union, Russia was one of the first nations to re-recognize Estonia's independence (the first country to do so was Iceland on 22 August 1991). Estonia's immediate priority after regaining its independence was the withdrawal of Russian (formerly Soviet) forces from Estonian territory. In August 1994, this was completed. However, relations with Moscow have remained strained primarily because Russia decided not to ratify the border treaty it had signed with Estonia in 1999.

Since regaining independence, Estonia has pursued a foreign policy of close cooperation with Western European nations.  The two most important policy objectives in this regard have been accession into NATO and the European Union, achieved in March and May 2004 respectively. Estonia's international realignment toward the West has been accompanied by a general deterioration in relations with Russia, most recently demonstrated by the controversy surrounding relocation of the Bronze Soldier WWII memorial in Tallinn.[1] Estonia has become an increasingly strong supporter of deepening European integration. The decision to participate in the preparation of a financial transaction tax in 2012 reflects this shift in Estonia's EU policy.[2]
An important element in Estonia's post-independence reorientation has been closer ties with the Nordic countries, especially Finland and Sweden. Indeed, Estonians consider themselves a Nordic people due to being Finnic people like the Finns rather than Balts,[3][4] based on their historical ties with Denmark and particularly Finland and Sweden. In December 1999 Estonian foreign minister (and since 2006, president of Estonia) Toomas Hendrik Ilves delivered a speech entitled "Estonia as a Nordic Country" to the Swedish Institute for International Affairs.[5] In 2003, the foreign ministry also hosted an exhibit called "Estonia: Nordic with a Twist".[6] And in 2005, Estonia joined the European Union's Nordic Battle Group. It has also shown continued interest in becoming a full member in the Nordic Council.
Whereas in 1992 Russia accounted for 92% of Estonia's international trade,[7] today there is extensive economic interdependence between Estonia and its Nordic neighbors: three-quarters of foreign investment in Estonia originates in the Nordic countries (principally Finland and Sweden), to which Estonia sends 42% of its exports (as compared to 6.5% going to Russia, 8.8% to Latvia, and 4.7% to Lithuania). On the other hand, the Estonian political system, its flat rate of income tax, and its non-welfare-state model distinguish it from the other Nordic states, and indeed from many other European countries.[8]
Estonia is a party to 181 international organizations, including the BIS, CBSS, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (member since 1 May 2004), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, ITUC, NATO, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNTSO, UPU, WCO, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union Estonia had hoped for the return of more than 2,000 square kilometers of territory annexed to Russia after World War II in 1945. The annexed land had been within the borders Estonia approved by Russia in the 1920 Tartu Peace Treaty. However, the Boris Yeltsin government disavowed any responsibility for acts committed by the Soviet Union.
After signing the border treaty by the corresponding foreign minister in 2005, it was ratified by the Estonian government and president. The Russian side interpreted the preamble as giving Estonia a possibility for future territorial claim, and Vladimir Putin notified Estonia that Russia will not consider these. Negotiations were reopened in 2012 and the Treaty was signed in February 2014. Ratification is still pending.[9]
List of countries which Estonia maintains diplomatic relations with:
Both countries established diplomatic relations in September 2012.[18]
Chile first recognized Estonia on 22 September 1921. Chile re-recognised Estonia on 28 August 1991 and diplomatic relations between the two countries were established on 27 September 1991. An agreement on visa-free travel between Estonia and Chile came into force on 2 December 2000.[22][23][24] The two countries also have in force a Memorandum on co-operation between the Ministries of Foreign Affairs.[22] Agreements on cultural, tourism, and IT cooperation are being readied.[22]
Chile is among Estonia's most important foreign trade partners in South America.[25]  In 2006, Estonia and Chile issued the joint Antarctic themed stamp series, designed by Ülle Marks and Jüri Kass, bearing images of the Emperor penguin and the minke whale.[26] The works of Chilean writers Isabel Allende, Pablo Neruda and José Donoso have been translated into Estonian.[22]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 19 April 1997.[30]
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 23 September 2009.[33]
In June 2020, Estonia openly opposed the Hong Kong national security law[36]
The establishment of diplomatic relations between Estonia and the Republic of Korea began on 1991-09-17. 
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 2 March 1995.
Russia recognized Estonia via the Tartu Peace Treaty on 2 February 1920. Russian-Estonian relations were re-established in January 1991, when leaders of the two countries, Boris Yeltsin of Russia and Arnold Rüütel of Estonia, met in Tallinn and signed a treaty on the relations of the two countries after the anticipated independence of Estonia from the Soviet Union.[49][50] The treaty envisaged the right to freely choose their citizenship for all permanent residents of Estonia at the time.
Russia re-recognized the Republic of Estonia on 24 August 1991 after the failed Soviet coup attempt, as one of the first countries to do so. The Soviet Union recognised the independence of Estonia on 6 September 1991. Estonia's ties with Boris Yeltsin's government weakened after the Russian president's initial show of solidarity with the Baltic states in January 1991. Issues surrounding the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic countries and Estonia's denial of automatic citizenship to persons who settled in Estonia in 1940–1991 and their offspring[51] ranked high on the list of points of contention.
The contractual and legal framework of relations between Ukraine and Estonia covers a wide range of branches of bilateral cooperation, including political, trade and economic, scientific and technical, humanitarian, law enforcement and other spheres. This base is ramified and efficient enough and includes 53 bilateral documents, among which are 3 interstate agreements, 15 intergovernmental and 35 interdepartmental.
Ukraine and Estonia bring together common aspirations in the political, economic, social and other spheres. Recognizing Ukraine as its foreign policy priority, Estonia is one of the most consistent supporters of Ukraine's European choice, supported the signing of the Agreement on the Association of Ukraine with the EU.
Intensive bilateral contacts between state and non-governmental institutions are developing, and interaction within the framework of international organizations is active. At the state level, the important role played by Ukraine in ensuring stability and security in Europe is constantly stressed. Estonia supports political and socio-economic reforms in Ukraine, provides substantial humanitarian, financial and advisory and technical assistance.
Both countries established diplomatic relations on 23 January 2009.[58]


