9365,
ForeignrelationsofElSalvador,
El Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control.
In November, 1950 El Salvador helped the newly empowered 14th Dalai Lama by supporting his Tibetan Government cabinet minister's telegram requesting an appeal before the General Assembly of the United Nations to stop the Communist China's People's Liberation Army's invasion of Tibet.[1]
El Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.
El Salvador has joined its six Central American neighbors in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development, known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA or CONCAUSA to promote sustainable economic development in the region.
List of countries with which El Salvador maintains diplomatic relations with:
El Salvador recognized the SADR on July 31, 1989. In April 1997, El Salvador cancelled relations with the SADR. In June 2009, and during a visit of SADR's president, Mohamed Abdelaziz, relations were restored. On November 30, 2010, the SADR and El Salvador upgrade their relations to ambassadorial level.[15]
Cuba and El Salvador have resumed diplomatic relations on June 1, 2009. El Salvador previously suspended diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961 due to the Cuban Revolution.[17]
Diplomatic relations between Mexico and El Salvador were established in 1838.
U.S. policy towards the country promotes the strengthening of El Salvador's democratic institutions, rule of law, judicial reform, and civilian police; national reconciliation and reconstruction; and economic opportunity and growth. El Salvador has been a committed member of the coalition of nations fighting against terrorism and has sent 10 rotations of troops to support the Iraq War.
 This article incorporates public domain material from U.S. Bilateral Relations Fact Sheets. United States Department of State.[21]
See El Salvador-Venezuela relations
In November 2019, El Salvador recognized opposition leader Juan Guaido as the legitimate President of Venezuela, cutting off relations with disputed president Nicolas Maduro's government.[24]
See China-El Salvador relations
On August 21, China's State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi held talks with El Salvador Foreign Minister Carlos Castaneda and signed a joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations, deciding to recognize each other and establish diplomatic relations at an ambassadorial level from the date of the communique's signing. The government of the Republic of China on Taiwan has preemptively severed diplomatic ties with El Salvador.[25]
El Salvador, which is home to a sizable ethnic Palestinian community, was widely expected to join the succession of South American governments that recognised Palestine in the end of 2010.[28] In May 2011, members of the country's Legislative Assembly including its president Sigfrido Reyes presented a proposal to the Cabinet to issue a statement formally recognising the State of Palestine.[29][30]
The Central American Integration System (SICA) was expected to adopt a co-ordinated position on the issue at its summit in San Salvador on 18 August.[31] However, El Salvador, as the nation presiding over the summit, refused to include the matter on the official agenda,[32] insisting that discussion should retain a regional focus.[33] Despite this, the government officially recognised the Palestinian state on 25 August 2011.[34]
The establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of Korea and the Republic of El Salvador began in August 1962 and the number of the South Koreans living in El Salvador in 2013 was about 258.[37]


