13075,
Gosford,

Gosford is a waterfront city on the northern extremity of Brisbane Water in the Central Coast Council local government area in the heart of the Central Coast in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Gosford is known for boating and scenic views on the foreshore of Brisbane Water and the surrounding valleys. It is situated 77 km (48 mi) north of Sydney and 86 km (53 mi) south of Newcastle. Gosford is the administrative and commercial centre as well as the gateway of the Central Coast region. 
Gosford, locally referred to as Gossy, is located in the northern eastern part of the Sydney Basin in the Darkinjung Country, while the Gosford City Centre is surrounded by valleys and facing towards Brisbane Water in the south, which extends towards the mouth of Brisbane Water at Ettalong Beach and connecting to Broken Bay, which is adjacent to the Pacific Ocean.
The regional city is the administrative centre and central business district of the Central Coast region and is the third largest urban area in New South Wales after Sydney and Newcastle. Gosford has been earmarked as a vital CBD spine under the NSW Metropolitan Strategy after the Central Coast Council was formed in 2016 from the Gosford City and Wyong Shire council merger.[3] The population of the Gosford area was 169,053 in 2016.[2]
Until white settlement, the area around Gosford was inhabited by the Guringai peoples, who were principally coastal-dwellers,[4] and the Darkinjung people that inhabited the hinterland.
Along with the other land around the Hawkesbury River estuary, the Brisbane Water district was explored during the early stages of the settlement of New South Wales.
Gosford itself was explored by State Governor Arthur Phillip between 1788 and 1789.[5] The area was difficult to access and settlement began around 1823. By the late 19th century the agriculture in the region was diversifying, with market gardens and citrus orchards occupying the rich soil left after the timber harvest. As late as 1850, the road between Hawkesbury (near Pittwater) and Brisbane Water was a cart wheel track.[6]
Typical of early Colonial settlement, convicts lived and worked in the Gosford area. In 1825, Gosford's population reached 100, of whom 50% were convicts.
East Gosford was the first centre of settlement. Gosford was named in 1839 after Archibald Acheson, 2nd Earl of Gosford – a friend of the then Governor of New South Wales George Gipps.[7] Acheson's title derives its name from Gosford, a townland (sub-division) of Markethill in County Armagh in Northern Ireland.
In 1887, the Main Northern railway line to Sydney was completed, requiring a bridge over the Hawkesbury River and a tunnel through the sandstone ridge west of Woy Woy. The introduction of this transport link and then the Pacific Highway in 1930 accelerated the development of the region.
Gosford became a town in 1885 and was declared a municipality in 1886.[8]
Mann Street, the spine of the Gosford CBD has been the subject of much debate, with urban planners having ambitions to make Gosford a small smart regional city with various plans for a performing arts center, greater choice in cafes and restaurants, new library, high speed rail linkage to Sydney and Newcastle, better pedestrian access from the Gosford Hospital, education and research precinct over the railway lines to Mann Street and a new Central Coast University promised at State and Federal elections. Availability of affordable car parking around Gosford railway station is an ongoing concern for rail commuters and visitors to Gosford CBD.
At the 2016 census, there were 3,499 people in Gosford. 59.6% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were India 4.5%, and England 2.9%. 65.2% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Mandarin at 3.7%. The most common responses for religion were No Religion 33.9% and Catholic 18.2%.[1]
The Gosford Statistical Area, which incorporates the whole of Gosford's city and suburbs, includes Avoca Beach, Erina, Ettalong Beach, Kariong, Kincumber, Narara, Terrigal, Woy Woy, and Wyoming,  and at the 2021 census had a population of 178,427.
Gosford has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa)[9] with warm summers and mild winters. In summer, temperatures average about 27–28 °C in the day with high humidity and about 17–18 °C at night. Winters are mild with cool overnight temperatures and mild to occasionally warm daytime temperatures with lower humidity. Records range from a maximum of 44.8 °C (113 °F) on 18 January 2013, to a low of −4.2 °C (24 °F) on 16 July 1970. Average rainfall is 1333 mm, much of which falls in the late summer and autumn. Rainfall is less common in late winter and early spring because of the foehn effect, as the city is located on the leeward side of the Great Dividing Range.[10]
Gosford proper is located in a valley with President's Hill on the city's western border, Rumbalara Reserve on its eastern border, and Brisbane Water to the city's south. Mann Street, Gosford's main street and part of the Pacific Highway, runs north-south and contains the frontage for much of the commercial district.
In the centre of Gosford is a shopping and community precinct, including Kibble Park, William Street Mall, Gosford City Library, the Imperial Shopping Centre and a full range of shops, cafes, banks and services.
A renewed period of optimism has followed demolition of several derelict buildings and several infrastructure investment projects including the full fibre optic telecommunications rollout of the National Broadband Network in 2012 in the city's CBD[13] as well as the so-called Kibbleplex project, announced in 2013[14] that plans to house the new regional library, tertiary teaching rooms and associated organisations.
Gosford is situated along an identified business growth corridor between Erina, the West Gosford light industrial zone and Somersby. Connectivity of main roads and rail travel times between Sydney, the Central Coast and the Hunter region are key issues for corporate business relocation to the region. Aged and personal care and retail are major employers in Gosford.[15]
As an entertainment hub, Mann Street enjoys relatively good public transport links and is one of the Central Coast's most popular spots for pubs and clubs and in close proximity to cultural and sporting events.
Yacht and other boat building has been undertaken by East Coast Yachts[16] since 1964[17] in West Gosford.
Gosford is home to:
Express Advocate: A News Corp Australia publication suburban style newspaper in the News Local Group
Gosford Community News has been published fortnightly by Ducks Crossing Publications since 2010.
Radio stations available in Gosford include:
Bus services in Gosford are operated by Busways and Red Bus Services. 
The Central Coast Highway cuts through Gosford's waterfront area, while its predecessor the, Pacific Highway, takes on several names through the CBD itself.
Mann Street contains the main public transport links for Gosford, including Gosford railway station, with NSW TrainLink services twice an hour to Sydney Central and Newcastle Interchange.
Gosford formerly had a professional team in the National Rugby League from 2000 until 2002, the Northern Eagles. The club, formed as a merger between the previously Gosford-bound North Sydney Bears and the Manly Warringah Sea Eagles, played its allocation of Gosford home matches at the purpose-built Central Coast Stadium. The club licence however reverted back to Manly in 2003 and the club was dissolved.
The Central Coast Mariners professional soccer team was formed in 2005 to participate in the A-League. The club has won two titles to date.
Locally, Gosford is the headquarters of the Central Coast Division Rugby League, which owns the Central Coast League Club in downtown Gosford. The suburb of Gosford has one current club, the St. Edwards Bears, and one junior club, the Gosford Kariong Storm. The Storm were initially a senior club as well, formed from the merger of the Gosford Townies/Giants and the nearby Kariong Kookaburras.
The Central Coast Rugby Union features eight first grade clubs and is one of the strongest local rugby union competitions in the state.
The city also has local AFL and cricket clubs as well as basketball and Netball teams.



Information box
{'Coordinates': '33°25′37″S 151°20′31″E', 'Population': '4,873 (2021 census)(suburb)[1]\n178,427 (2021 census)(SA3)[2]', 'Postcode(s)': '2250', 'Elevation': '20 m (66 ft)', 'Time zone': 'AEST (UTC+10)', ' • Summer (DST)': 'AEST (UTC+11)', 'Location': '77 km (48 mi) NNE of Sydney\n839 km (521 mi) SSW of Brisbane\n86 km (53 mi) SW of Newcastle\n21 km (13 mi) SW of Wyong\n22 km (14 mi) SSW of The Entrance', 'LGA(s)': 'Central Coast Council', 'Region': 'Central Coast', 'County': 'Northumberland', 'State electorate(s)': 'Gosford', 'Federal division(s)': 'Robertson'}