14285,
Historyofscienceandtechnology,
The history of science and technology (HST) is a field of history that examines the understanding of the natural world (science) and the ability to manipulate it (technology) at different points in time. This academic discipline also studies the cultural, economic, and political impacts of and contexts for scientific practices.
History of science is an academic discipline with an international community of specialists. Main professional organizations for this field include the History of Science Society, the British Society for the History of Science, and the European Society for the History of Science.
Much of the study of the history of science has been devoted to answering questions about what science is, how it functions, and whether it exhibits large-scale patterns and trends.[1]
Histories of science were originally written by practicing and retired scientists,[2] starting primarily with William Whewell's History of the Inductive Sciences (1837), as a way to communicate the virtues of science to the public.[citation needed]
Auguste Comte proposed that there should be a specific discipline to deal with the history of science.[citation needed]
The development of the distinct academic discipline of the history of science and technology did not occur until the early 20th century.[citation needed] Historians have suggested that this was bound to the changing role of science during the same time period.[citation needed]
After World War I, extensive resources were put into teaching and researching the discipline, with the hopes that it would help the public better understand both Science and Technology as they came to play an exceedingly prominent role in the world.[citation needed]
In the decades since the end of World War II, history of science became an academic discipline, with graduate schools, research institutes, public and private patronage, peer-reviewed journals, and professional societies.[citation needed]
In the United States, a more formal study of the history of science as an independent discipline was initiated by George Sarton's publications, Introduction to the History of Science (1927) and the journal Isis (founded in 1912).[citation needed] Sarton exemplified the early 20th-century view of the history of science as the history of great men and great ideas.[citation needed] He shared with many of his contemporaries a Whiggish belief in history as a record of the advances and delays in the march of progress.[citation needed]
The study of the history of science continued to be a small effort until the rise of Big Science after World War II.[citation needed] With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard, the history of science began to become an established subdiscipline of history in the United States.[3]
In the United States, the influential bureaucrat Vannevar Bush, and the president of Harvard, James Conant, both encouraged the study of the history of science as a way of improving general knowledge about how science worked, and why it was essential to maintain a large scientific workforce.[citation needed]
History of science and technology is a well-developed field in India. At least three generations of scholars can be identified.
The first generation includes D.D.Kosambi, Dharmpal, Debiprasad Chattopadhyay and Rahman. The second generation mainly consists of Ashis Nandy, Deepak Kumar, Dhruv Raina, S. Irfan Habib, Shiv Visvanathan, Gyan Prakash, Stan Lourdswamy, V.V. Krishna, Itty Abraham, Richard Grove, Kavita Philip, Mira Nanda and Rob Anderson. There is an emergent third generation that includes scholars like Abha Sur and Jahnavi Phalkey.[citation needed]
Departments and Programmes
The National Institute of Science, Technology and Development Studies had a research group active in the 1990s which consolidated social history of science as a field of research in India. 
Currently there are several institutes and university departments offering HST programmes.
Ukraine
Academic study of the history of science as an independent discipline was launched by George Sarton at Harvard with his book Introduction to the History of Science (1927) and the Isis journal (founded in 1912).  Sarton exemplified the early 20th century view of the history of science as the history of great men and great ideas. He shared with many of his contemporaries a Whiggish belief in history as a record of the advances and delays in the march of progress. The History of Science was not a recognized subfield of American history in this period, and most of the work was carried out by interested Scientists and Physicians rather than professional Historians.[34]  With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard, the history of Science became an established subdiscipline of history after 1945.[35]
See also the list of George Sarton medalists.
Historiography of science
History of science as a discipline


