13412,
HongKongGarrison,

The People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison is a garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), responsible for defence duties in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) since the sovereignty of Hong Kong was transferred to China in 1997. Prior to the handover of Hong Kong, the territory was under British rule, and the defence of the territory was the responsibility of the British Forces Overseas Hong Kong, with auxiliary help from the Royal Hong Kong Regiment.
The garrison is headquartered in Chinese People's Liberation Army Forces Hong Kong Building in Central, Hong Kong. The combined[clarification needed] size of the Hong Kong garrison is approximately 10,000–12,000 personnel including members of the People's Armed Police.[4]
The People's Republic of China (PRC) assumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on 1 July 1997 and the Central People's Government (CPG) stationed a garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) in Hong Kong to manage the defense affairs of the territory. While the garrison has been considered primarily symbolic of Beijing's governance over Hong Kong, it is nevertheless asserted to be a combat-ready force.[5]
The Basic Law upon the territory provides that the CPG shall be responsible for the defense of Hong Kong and shall bear the expenditure for the garrison, whereas the colonial Hong Kong Government before 1997 had to pay for the military. The Garrison Law, subsequently enacted by the National People's Congress, contains specific provisions on the duties and rules of discipline of the garrison personnel, jurisdiction and other questions, to facilitate the Hong Kong Garrison in fulfilling its defence functions along legal lines. Military forces stationed in Hong Kong shall not interfere in the local affairs and the Hong Kong government shall be responsible for the maintenance of public order. The Garrison formally stationed in Hong Kong assumed defence responsibility for Hong Kong from midnight onwards on 1 July 1997.
The Hong Kong Garrison includes elements of the People's Liberation Army Ground Force, PLA Navy, and PLA Air Force; these forces are under the direct leadership of the Central Military Commission in Beijing and under the administrative control of the adjacent Southern Theater Command.
While performing its defense duties, the Hong Kong Garrison must abide by both national and Hong Kong laws, as well as the current rules and regulations of the PLA, according to the Garrison Law, a PRC law. After its entry into Hong Kong, the Hong Kong Garrison abide by the Basic Law and the Garrison Law, actively organizing military training. According to the Garrison Law, the Garrison established working contacts with the Hong Kong Government, and opened the barracks on Stonecutters Island and Stanley to the public to promote Hong Kong people's understanding of and trust in the garrison forces and their personnel. Annual open house events are held to showcase the assets and combat readiness of the garrison personnel. Garrison troop rotations are also routine.[6][7]
In early 2022, Chairman of the Central Military Commission Xi Jinping, appointed Major General Peng Jingtang, a former People's Armed Police paramilitary commander, to lead the PLA garrison in Hong Hong.[8]
Personnel in the Hong Kong Garrison wore uniforms different from their mainland counterparts until a new set of uniforms were introduced in 2007. Motor vehicles in the military are right-hand drive, like civilian vehicles in Hong Kong, and carry number plates that start with ZG, standing for zhùgǎng (驻港/駐港), Chinese for "[stationed] in Hong Kong."
The Hong Kong Garrison reports to both the Southern Theater Command and Central Military Commission in Beijing, and informs Hong Kong Government of any actions within or around Hong Kong.
There are 19 sites occupied by the Garrison across Hong Kong. According to a Reuters investigation, many of these sites are run down and not fully utilised, which has caused some to argue that the land should be returned and used for housing.[10] The Tsing Shan firing range occupies approximately 80% of the 2,750 hectares of land managed by the PLA.[11][12]
A secret 20th site was discovered in 2014, without the PLA informing the public, as required by the Garrison Law.[13]
The Commander lives on The Peak at Headquarters House, 11 Barker Road. Other property owned by the Garrison includes the United Services Recreation Club.
Bases within Hong Kong are former British facilities namely from the British Army:
The naval presence in Hong Kong is a limited sub-station with a small flotilla of ships rotating from bases in the mainland China:
Various ships of the People's Liberation Army Navy visit the base, but only a few ships remain on semi-permanent basis.
597 钦州 / Qinzhou
Two 25 mm guns
PLA Hong Kong Garrison has three airbases, with two of these within Hong Kong:



Information box
{'Founded': '1 July 1997; 26 years ago', 'Country': " People's Republic of China\n∟  Hong Kong", 'Allegiance': 'Chinese Communist Party', 'Branch': ' PLA Ground Force\n PLA Navy\n PLA Air Force', 'Size': '10,000 to 12,000[1]', 'Part of': 'Southern Theater Command', 'Garrison/HQ': "Chinese People's Liberation Army Forces Hong Kong Building\n22.2817325°N 114.1641229°E", 'Commander': 'Major General Peng Jingtang', 'Political Commissar[3]': 'Major General Cai Yongzhong[2]', 'Traditional Chinese': '中國人民解放軍駐香港部隊', 'Simplified Chinese': '中国人民解放军驻香港部队', 'Literal meaning': 'China People Liberation Army stationing Hong Kong Troops', '': ''}