36704,
HP-UX,
HP-UX (from "Hewlett Packard Unix") is Hewlett Packard Enterprise's proprietary implementation of the Unix operating system, based on Unix System V (initially System III) and first released in 1984. Current versions support HPE Integrity Servers, based on Intel's Itanium architecture.
Earlier versions of HP-UX supported the HP Integral PC and HP 9000 Series 200, 300, and 400 computer systems based on the Motorola 68000 series of processors, the HP 9000 Series 500 computers based on HP's proprietary FOCUS architecture, and later HP 9000 Series models based on HP's PA-RISC instruction set architecture.
HP-UX was the first Unix to offer access control lists for file access permissions as an alternative to the standard Unix permissions system.[citation needed] HP-UX was also among the first Unix systems to include a built-in logical volume manager.[citation needed] HP has had a long partnership with Veritas Software, and uses VxFS as the primary file system.
It is one of three commercial operating systems that have versions certified to The Open Group's UNIX 03 standard.  (The others are macOS and AIX.)[2]
HP-UX 11i offers a common shared disks for its clustered file system. HP Serviceguard is the cluster solution for HP-UX. HP Global Workload Management adjusts workloads to optimize performance, and integrates with Instant Capacity on Demand so installed resources can be paid for in 30-minute increments as needed for peak workload demands.
HP-UX offers operating system-level virtualization features such as hardware partitions, isolated OS virtual partitions on cell-based servers, and HP Integrity Virtual Machines (HPVM) on all Integrity servers.  HPVM supports guests running on HP-UX 11i v3 hosts – guests can run Linux, Windows Server, OpenVMS or HP-UX.  HP supports online VM guest migration, where encryption can secure the guest contents during migration.
HP-UX 11i v3 scales as follows (on a SuperDome 2 with 32 Intel Itanium 9560 processors):
The 11i v2 release introduced kernel-based intrusion detection, strong random number generation, stack buffer overflow protection, security partitioning, role-based access management, and various open-source security tools.
HP classifies the operating system's security features into three categories: data, system and identity:[4]
Release 6.x (together with 3.x) introduced the context dependent files (CDF) feature, a method of allowing a fileserver to serve different configurations and binaries (and even architectures) to different client machines in a heterogeneous environment. A directory containing such files had its suid bit set and was made hidden from both ordinary and root processes under normal use. Such a scheme was sometimes exploited by intruders to hide malicious programs or data.[6] CDFs and the CDF filesystem were dropped with release 10.0.
HP-UX operating systems supports a variety of PA-RISC systems. The 11.0 added support for Integrity-based servers for the transition from PA-RISC to Itanium. HP-UX 11i v1.5 is the first version that supported Itanium. On the introduction of HP-UX 11i v2 the operating system supported both of these architectures.[7]
HP-UX 11i supports HPE Integrity Servers of HP BL server blade family. These servers use the Intel Itanium architecture.
HP-UX 11i v2 and 11i v3 support HP's CX series servers. CX stands for carrier grade and is used mainly for telco industry with -48V DC support and is NEBS certified. Both of these systems contain Itanium Mad6M processors and are discontinued.
HP-UX supports HP's RX series of servers.[citation needed]
Prior to the release of HP-UX version 11.11, HP used a decimal version numbering scheme with the first number giving the major release and the number following the decimal showing the minor release. With 11.11, HP made a marketing decision to name their releases 11i followed by a v(decimal-number) for the version. The i was intended to indicate the OS is Internet-enabled, but the effective result was a dual version-numbering scheme.
HP bundles HP-UX 11i with programs in packages they call Operating Environments (OEs).[21]
The following lists the currently available HP-UX 11i v3 OEs:



Information box
{'Developer': 'Hewlett Packard Enterprise', 'Written in': 'C', 'OS family': 'Unix (System V)', 'Working state': 'Current', 'Source model': 'Closed source', 'Initial release': '1982; 41 years ago', 'Latest release': 'HP-UX 11i v3 2023[1] / May 2023; 2 months ago', 'Marketing target': 'Server', 'Available in': 'English', 'Package manager': 'Software Distributor', 'Platforms': 'IA-64, PA-RISC', 'Kernel type': 'Monolithic with dynamically loadable modules', 'Userland': 'POSIX / SUS', 'Default\nuser interface': 'KDE, GNOME and CDE', 'License': 'Proprietary', 'Official website': 'www.hpe.com/info/hpux'}