33999,
Listofcocktails,

A cocktail is a mixed drink typically made with a distilled liquor (such as arrack, brandy, cachaça, gin, rum, tequila, vodka, or whiskey) as its base ingredient that is then mixed with other ingredients or garnishments.  Sweetened liqueurs, wine, or beer may also serve as the base or be added. If beer is one of the ingredients, the drink is called a beer cocktail.
Cocktails often also contain one or more types of juice, fruit, honey, milk or cream, spices, or other flavorings. Cocktails may vary in their ingredients from bartender to bartender, and from region to region. Two creations may have the same name but taste very different because of differences in how the drinks are prepared.
This article is organized by the primary type of alcohol (by volume) contained in the beverage. Cocktails marked with "IBA" are designated as IBA official cocktails by the International Bartenders Association, and are some of the most popular cocktails worldwide.
Cocktails made with beer are classified as beer cocktails.
This fruity, blended piña colada is typical of many rum-based cocktails.
A mojito served in Slovakia
The margarita is the most popular cocktail in the U.S.[1]
A tequila sunrise
A paloma
A Bloody Mary garnished with lemon, carrot, celery, and pitted manzanilla olives
A screwdriver
A Harvey Wallbanger
A Manhattan
An old fashioned
A Sazerac at the Sazerac Bar, The Roosevelt New Orleans Hotel
The following drinks are technically cocktails because fortified wines are a mixture of distilled spirits and wine.
Coffee-flavored drinks
A liqueur containing cream, imparting a milkshake-like flavor
An intensely green, mint-flavored liqueur
A colorless mint-flavored liqueur
One of several orange-flavored liqueurs, like Grand Marnier, triple sec, or Curaçao
A clear, bright-green, melon-flavored liqueur

Strawberries can be muddled or puréed and added to many drinks, and they are liquor-friendly, being compatible with, e.g., bourbon whiskey,[3] Cointreau, vodka, tequila, rum, and Champagne,[4] among other spirits and liqueurs and so on.[5]
Some recipes call for a strawberry syrup that can be made using strawberries, vanilla extract, sugar, and water.[6] Some strawberry cocktail recipes do not call for a syrup, but rely on puréed strawberries to play that part.[7]
Strawberries are often mixed with basil.[8] Strawberry is popular in smashes since after the beverage has been drank, the alcohol-infused strawberries can be consumed as well.
Carrot juice can be mixed with spirits such as agave spirits, whiskey, tequila, gin, or mezcal. Vodka is sometimes chosen because its neutral taste allows more of the carrot juice taste to shine through. Carrot juice can also be mixed with liqueurs such as amaro. ginger, orange, lemon and honey can be other ingredients in carrot juice cocktails. Turmeric infusions are also common. Examples of drinks made with carrot juice include:[22]
A smash is a casual icy julep (spirits, sugar, and herb)[31] cocktail filled with hunks of fresh fruit, so that after the liquid part of the drink has been consumed, one can also eat the alcohol-infused fruit (e.g. strawberries). The history of smashes goes back at least as far as the 1862 book How to Mix Drinks.[32] The old-style whiskey smash was an example of an early smash.[33]
The herb used in a smash is often mint, although basil is sometimes used in cocktails that go well with it, e.g. many strawberry cocktails. The name "smash" comes from the idea that on a hot day, one takes whatever fruit is on hand and smashes it all together to make a refreshing beverage.[34] Generally a smash will have crushed ice.[35]
A number of hard lemonades, such as Lynchburg lemonade (whose alcoholic ingredient is Jack Daniel's Tennessee whiskey) have been marketed. This section includes drinks that have the ingredients of lemonade (lemon juice and sugar).
A lemon-lime soda cocktail is a cocktail made with lemon-lime soda such as Sprite.
Hard cider has been produced by a number of companies, e.g. Woodchuck Hard Cider. Apple-flavored malt beverage products have also been sold by companies like Redd's Apple Ale, but these do not actually contain fermented apple juice.
A ginger soda cocktail is a cocktail with ginger ale or ginger beer. Small Town Brewery produced the 5.90% ABV Not Your Father's Ginger Ale.[95] Coney Island Brewing Co. Henry's Hard Soda produced the 4.2% ABV Henry's Hard Ginger Ale. Others have included Crabbie's Original Alcoholic Ginger Beer (4.8 percent) and Spiced Orange Alcoholic Ginger Beer (4.8 percent), Fentimen's Alcoholic Ginger Beer (4 percent), and New City Ginger Beer (8 percent).[96]
Some cola cocktails are made by the brewer; for example, McAles sells a "hard cola" that is a malt beverage with kola and other natural flavors and caramel color added.[99] Jack Daniel's and Miller Brewing also introduced a hard cola, "Black Jack Cola".[100] Henry's Hard Soda introduced a hard cherry cola.
A tonic cocktail is a cocktail that contains tonic syrup or tonic water. Tonic water is usually combined with gin for a gin and tonic, or mixed with vodka. However, it can also be used in cocktails with cognac, cynar, Lillet Blanc or Lillet Rosé, rum, tequila, or white port.[102]


