31945,
Listofmetrosystems,


This list of metro systems includes electrified rapid transit train systems worldwide. In some parts of the world, metro systems are referred to as subways, U-Bahn or undergrounds. As of May 2023[update], 194 cities in 62 countries have a metro system. 
The London Underground first opened as an underground railway in 1863 and its first electrified underground line opened in 1890,[1] making it the world's oldest metro system.[2] The Shanghai Metro is the world's longest metro network at 803 kilometres (499 mi) and has the highest annual ridership at 2.83 billion trips.[3] The New York City Subway has the greatest number of stations with 472.[4][5] As of 2023, the country with the most metro systems is China, with 47 in operation.[6]
The International Association of Public Transport (L'Union Internationale des Transports Publics, or UITP) defines metro systems as urban passenger transport systems, "operated on their own right of way and segregated from general road and pedestrian traffic".[7][8] The terms heavy rail (mainly in North America) and heavy urban rail are essentially synonymous with the term "metro".[9][10][11] Heavy rail systems are also specifically defined as an "electric railway".[9][10]
The dividing line between metro and other modes of public transport, such as light rail[9][10] and commuter rail,[9][10] is not always clear. The UITP only makes distinctions between "metros" and "light rail",[7] the American Public Transportation Association (APTA) and Federal Transit Administration (FTA) distinguish all three modes.[9][10] A common way to distinguish metro from light rail is by their separation from other traffic. While light rail systems may share roads or have level crossings, a metro system runs, almost always, on a grade-separated exclusive right-of-way, with no access for pedestrians and other traffic. 
In contrast to commuter rail or light rail, metro systems are primarily used for transport within a city, and have higher service frequencies and substantially higher passenger volume capacities. Most metro systems do not share tracks with freight trains or inter-city rail services. It is not relevant whether the system runs on steel wheels or rubber tyres, or if the power supply is from a third rail or overhead line.
The name of the system is not a criterion for inclusion or exclusion. Some cities use metro as a brand name for a transit line with no component of rapid transit whatsoever. Similarly, there are systems branded light rail that meet every criterion for being a rapid transit system. Some systems also incorporate light metro or light rail lines as part of the larger system under a common name. These are listed, but the light rail lines are not counted in the provided network data. 
Certain transit networks may match the service standards of metro systems, but reach far out of the city and are sometimes known as S-Bahn, suburban, regional or commuter rail. These are not included in this list. Neither are funicular systems, or people movers, such as amusement park, ski resort and airport transport systems.
This list counts metros separately when multiple metros in one city or metropolitan area have separate owners or operating companies. This list expressly does not aim at representing the size and scope of the total rapid transit network of a certain city or metropolitan area. The data of this list should not be used to infer the size of a city's, region's, or country's urban rail transit systems, or to establish a ranking.
This list is sortable. Click on the  icon in the column header to change sort key and sort order.
Note: This list may not be fully representative, as yearly ridership numbers during the COVID-19 pandemic are shown for some systems, while others have numbers from previous years.
^*  Indicates ridership figures based on the fiscal year rather than the calendar year.
^*  Indicates ridership figures based on the fiscal year rather than the calendar year.
The following is a list of new worldwide metro systems that are currently actively under construction. Note that in some cases it is not clear if the system will be considered a full metro system once it begins operational service. Only metro systems under construction are listed where there are no metro systems currently in operation in the same city.
The countries of Ivory Coast and Serbia are currently constructing their first ever metro systems.
As for the station opened after the end of 2019, see "Estação Estrada Parque começa a funcionar na segunda-feira" [Estrada Parque station starts operating on Monday]. Correio Braziliense (in Brazilian Portuguese). Diários Associados. 3 January 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2020.As for the section opened after the end of 2017, see "Ce que va permettre le prolongement de la ligne 14 du métro à Paris" [What the extension of metro line 14 in Paris will allow]. L'Express (in French). Altice Europe N.V. 14 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020.As for the section opened after the end of 2009, see Fender, Keith (4 December 2020). "Berlin U5 extension opens". International Railway Journal. Simmons-Boardman Publishing Inc. Retrieved 8 December 2020.As for the latest extension, see "'CMRL likely to handle up to 3.5L daily commuters soon'". The Times of India. Chennai: The Times Group - Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. 14 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021.As for the section opened after the end of 2019, see Roy, Subhajoy (14 February 2020). "First phase of East-West Metro unveiled". The Telegraph. Ananda Bazar Patrika (ABP) Group. Retrieved 15 February 2020.As for the Line 1, which was extended after the end of 2018, see Lee, In-kyung (14 December 2020). 인천도시철도 1호선 송도달빛축제공원역 개통 기념 첫 손님맞이행사 실시 [First-guest-welcoming event to commemorate the opening of Songdo Moonlight Festival Park Station on Incheon Metro Line 1]. www.itrailnews.co.kr (in Korean). Rail News Corp. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2020.As for the part of the system which SML9 is in charge of (line 9, 1st stage), see
As for the Suin Line, which was extended after the end of 2013, see Burroughs, David (15 September 2020). "Final phase of Korea's Suin Line complete". International Railway Journal. Simmons-Boardman Publishing Inc. Retrieved 17 September 2020.As for the latest extension, see "L'estació de Zona Franca de la línia 10 Sud de metro obrirà les portes dissabte a les 3 de la tarda". Transports Metropolitans de Barcelona (TMB). 30 January 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020.As for the latest extension, see "La Comunidad abre la estación de metro Arroyofresno al público tras 20 años" [The Community of Madrid opens Arroyofresno metro station to the public after 20 years]. La Vanguardia (in Spanish). Grupo Godó. 21 March 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2020.This ridership figure includes the ViaQuatro Line 4 and Via Mobilidade Line 5 ridership in the total.This ridership figure is the sum of those quoted for the rapid transit linesAnnual ridership figure is calculated from the 2378229 passenger daily average quoted for metro lines (高速鉄道) only.Annual ridership figure is calculated from the 259468 passenger daily average quoted.This ridership figure is the sum of those quoted for the rapid transit linesThe ridership figure includes system-wide ridership.This ridership figure is derived from the sum of the twelve monthly subtotals for 2020This ridership figure is derived from the sum of the twelve monthly subtotals for 2020This ridership figure is derived from the sum of the twelve monthly subtotals for 2019This ridership figure is derived from the sum of the twelve monthly subtotals for 2020.This ridership figure is derived from the sum of the twelve monthly subtotals for 2019

