38362,
ListofislandsofNewZealand,

New Zealand consists of more than six hundred islands, mainly remnants of a larger land mass now beneath the sea.[1] New Zealand is the seventh-largest island country, and the third-largest located entirely in the Southern Hemisphere. The following is a list of islands of New Zealand.
The two largest islands – where most of the human population lives – have names in both English and in the Māori language. They are the North Island or Te Ika-a-Māui and the South Island or Te Waipounamu.[2] Various Māori iwi sometimes use other names, with some preferring to call the South Island Te Waka o Aoraki.[3] The two islands are separated by the Cook Strait. In general practice, the term mainland refers to the North Island and South Island.[4][5] However, the South Island alone is sometimes called "the mainland" – especially by its residents, as a nickname – because it is the larger of the two main islands.[6][Note 1]
To the south of the South Island, Stewart Island / Rakiura is the largest of the smaller islands, and Waiheke Island in the urban Auckland Region has the largest population of the smaller islands.
The following table lists the largest islands of New Zealand proper by area.[Note 2] River delta islands such as Rakaia Island (25.7 km2 (9.9 sq mi)),[8] Fereday Island, Rangitata Island, and Inch Clutha (approximately 15 km2 (5.8 sq mi), 30 square kilometres (12 square miles), and 35 km2 (14 sq mi) respectively) are omitted, as are temporary islands in braided river channels and tidal islands such as Rabbit Island, Nelson (17 km2 (6.6 sq mi)). The country's largest island within a lake, Pomona Island, has an area of just 2.6 km2 (1.0 sq mi).[9]
The following table lists the islands of New Zealand by their highest elevation. These islands are all in harbours or the open sea. The country's tallest island within a lake, Pomona Island, rises to 511 metres (1,677 ft) above sea level, which is about 333 metres (1,093 ft) above Lake Manapouri's normal lake level.
New Zealand administers the following islands outside the main archipelago. Only the Chatham Islands have a permanent population although others also did in the past. Others host visitors for science, conservation, meteorological observation and tourism.
The New Zealand Subantarctic Islands are designated as a World Heritage Site.
The following islands are part of the Realm of New Zealand, but are not part of New Zealand proper:
New Zealand also claims the Ross Dependency in Antarctica, including:


