20832,
Manifesto,

A manifesto is a published declaration of the intentions, motives, or views of the issuer, be it an individual, group, political party or government.[1][2][3][4] A manifesto usually accepts a previously published opinion or public consensus or promotes a new idea with prescriptive notions for carrying out changes the author believes should be made. It often is political, social or artistic in nature, sometimes revolutionary, but may present an individual's life stance. Manifestos relating to religious belief are generally referred to as creeds or confessions of faith.
It is derived from the Italian word manifesto, itself derived from the Latin manifestum, meaning clear or conspicuous. Its first recorded use in English is from 1620, in Nathaniel Brent's translation of Paolo Sarpi's History of the Council of Trent: "To this citation he made answer by a Manifesto" (p. 102). Similarly, "They were so farre surprised with his Manifesto, that they would never suffer it to be published" (p. 103).[5]
1. The Communist Manifesto (1848) written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in 1848, was a manifesto that outlined the principles of communism and called for the overthrow of capitalism. It has been a hugely influential document in the history of socialism and communism. It has been controversial since its publication, with some critics arguing that it advocates for the violent overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of a totalitarian state. Others argue that it has been misinterpreted and that its principles have been distorted by authoritarian regimes [6].
2. The "Port Huron Statement" (1962)  was a statement of principles and values that was issued by the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), a student activist organization in the United States. This manifesto called for greater democracy, individual freedom, and social justice, and it challenged the prevailing norms of American society at the time. The "Port Huron Statement" helped to inspire a generation of young activists and was a defining document of the New Left movement. It has been criticized for being too radical, wanting utopian and unrealistic changes [7]. 
3. The Feminine Mystique (1963) written by Betty Friedan in 1963 (not a very traditional manifesto, but is considered one by some), was a manifesto that argued that women's lives in post-World War II America were unfulfilling and oppressive. It helped launch the feminist movement in the United States and influenced the development of second-wave feminism. It has been criticized by some for being too focused on the experiences of white, middle-class women, and for not doing enough to address the experiences of women of color, working-class women, and other marginalized groups [8] [9].


