19958,
MarioBotta,
Mario Botta (born 1 April 1943) is a Swiss architect. 
Botta designed his first building, a two-family house at Morbio Superiore in Ticino, at age 16. He graduated from the Università Iuav di Venezia (1969).[1] While the arrangements of spaces in this structure is inconsistent, its relationship to its site, separation of living from service spaces, and deep window recesses echo of what would become his stark, strong, towering style. His designs tend to include a strong sense of geometry, often being based on very simple shapes, yet creating unique volumes of space.[citation needed] His buildings are often made of brick, yet his use of material is wide, varied, and often unique.[citation needed]
His trademark style can be seen widely in Switzerland particularly the Ticino region and also in the Mediatheque in Villeurbanne (1988), a cathedral in Évry (1995), and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art or SFMOMA (1994). He also designed the Europa-Park Dome, which houses many major events at the Europa-Park theme park resort in Germany. Religious works by Botta, including the Cymbalista Synagogue and Jewish Heritage Center were shown in London at the Royal Institute of British Architects in an exhibition entitled, Architetture del Sacro: Prayers in Stone.[2] “A church is the place, par excellence, of architecture,” he said in an interview with architectural historian Judith Dupré. “When you enter a church, you already are part of what has transpired and will transpire there. The church is a house that puts a believer in a dimension where he or she is the protagonist.  The sacred directly lives in the collective. Man becomes a participant in a church, even if he never says anything.”[3]
In 1998, he designed the new bus station for Vimercate (near Milan), a red brick building linked to many facilities, underlining the city's recent development.
He worked at La Scala's theatre renovation, which proved controversial as preservationists feared that historic details would be lost.[4][5]
In 2004, he designed Museum One of the Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art in Seoul, South Korea.[6] On January 1, 2006 he received the Grand Officer award from President of the Italian Republic Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. In 2006, he designed his first ever spa, the Bergoase Spa in Arosa, Switzerland. The spa opened in December 2006 and cost an estimated CHF 35 million. Mario Botta participated in the Stock Exchange of Visions project in 2007. He was a member of the Jury of the Global Holcim Awards in 2012. In 2014, he was awarded with the Prize Javier Carvajal by the Universidad de Navarra.[7]
First construction of Mario Botta 1961–1963. Parish house in Genestrerio
Church of St. John the Baptist in the Swiss town of Mogno
Évry Cathedral in Évry, France
Facade of Évry Cathedral (photo by Pino Musi)
Évry Cathedral from the northwest
Interior of Évry Cathedral
Swisscom telecommunication headquarters in Bellinzona
Harting Technologiegruppe headquarters in Minden
La Fortezza building, Maastricht, the Netherlands
Watari Museum of Contemporary Art in Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in San Francisco
Casinò di Campione in Campione d'Italia
Bechtler Museum of Modern Art in Charlotte, North Carolina
Stadt- und Landesbibliothek (Central library) in Dortmund
Chiesa di Santa Maria degli Angeli on Monte Tamaro
Chiesa di Santa Maria degli Angeli on Monte Tamaro
Cymbalista Synagogue and Jewish Heritage Center in Tel Aviv, Israel



Information box
{'Born': 'April 1, 1943 (age 80)\nMendrisio, Switzerland', 'Nationality': 'Swiss', 'Occupation': 'Architect', 'Buildings': 'National Bank of Greece, Athens\nSan Francisco Museum of Modern Art\nBechtler Museum of Modern Art, Charlotte, NC\nSanta Maria degli Angeli, Monte Tamaro, Switzerland'}