19994,
MasamuneShirow,
Masanori Ota (太田正典, Ōta Masanori, born November 23, 1961), better known by his pen name Masamune Shirow (士郎 正宗, Shirō Masamune), is a Japanese manga artist.[1] Shirow is best known for the manga Ghost in the Shell, which has since been turned into three theatrical anime films, two anime television series, an anime television movie, an anime ONA series, a theatrical live action movie, and several video games.
Born in the Hyōgo Prefecture capital city of Kobe, he studied oil painting at Osaka University of Arts. While in college, he developed an interest in manga, which led him to create his own complete work, Black Magic, which was published in the manga dōjinshi Atlas. His work caught the eye of Seishinsha President Harumichi Aoki, who offered to publish him.
The result was best-selling[2] manga Appleseed, a full volume of densely plotted drama taking place in an ambiguous future. The story was a sensation, and won the 1986 Seiun Award for Best Manga. After a professional reprint of Black Magic and a second volume of Appleseed, he released Dominion in 1986. Two more volumes of Appleseed followed before he began work on Ghost in the Shell.
In 2007, he collaborated again with Production I.G to co-create the original concept for the anime television series Ghost Hound, Production I.G's 20th anniversary project. A further original collaboration with Production I.G began airing in April 2008, titled Real Drive.
Dominion (ドミニオン, Dominion) series:
Ghost in the Shell (攻殻機動隊, Kōkaku Kidōtai) series:
Stand-alones:
A substantial amount of Shirow's work has been released in art book or poster book format. The following is an incomplete list.
Galgrease (published in Uppers Magazine, 2002) is the collected name of several erotic manga and poster books by Shirow. The name comes from the fact that the women depicted often look "greased".
The first series of Galgrease booklets included four issues each in the following settings:
The second series included another run of 12 booklets in the following worlds:
After each regular series, there were one or more bonus poster books that revisited the existing characters and settings.



Information box
{'Born': 'Masanori Ota\nNovember 23, 1961 (age 61)\nKobe, Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan', 'Nationality': 'Japanese', 'Area(s)': 'Manga artist', 'Pseudonym(s)': 'Shirou Masamune', 'Notable works': 'Appleseed, Ghost in the Shell', 'Awards': 'Seiun Award (for Appleseed)'}