21977,
NeoGeoPocket,
The Neo Geo Pocket is a monochrome handheld game console released by SNK. It was the company's first handheld system and is part of the Neo Geo family. It debuted in Japan in late 1998 but never saw an American release, being exclusive to Japan, Asia and Europe[citation needed].
The Neo Geo Pocket received lower than expected sales and it was discontinued in 1999,[1] immediately being succeeded by the Neo Geo Pocket Color, a full color device allowing the system to compete more easily with the dominant Game Boy Color handheld, and which also saw an American release. Though the system enjoyed only a short life, there were some significant games released on the system such as Samurai Shodown, and King of Fighters R-1.
Neo Geo Pocket cartridges are smaller than Game Boy cartridges.[2]
The Neo Geo Pocket is forward compatible with the majority of Neo Geo Pocket Color titles, although games for the color system will play in monochrome on a Neo Geo Pocket. Likewise, the Neo Geo Pocket Color is backward compatible and the entire Neo Geo Pocket library can be played on the color system.
Only ten monochrome games were released for the Neo Geo Pocket before it was discontinued:
After the release of the Neo Geo Pocket Color, several of these titles began receiving re-releases, updated to include color. All but King of Fighters R-1, Melon-chan's Growth Diary, Samurai Shodown and the original Neo Geo Cup 98 (the "Plus" version was updated instead) were eventually re-released for the color system.
When playing the Monochrome Samurai Shodown in the color system the game will play in color.
XGP



Information box
{'Manufacturer': 'SNK', 'Product family': 'Neo Geo', 'Type': 'Handheld game console', 'Generation': 'Fifth', 'Release date': 'JP: October 28, 1998\nEU: 1998[citation needed]', 'Lifespan': '1998–99', 'Discontinued': 'JP: 1999', 'Media': 'ROM cartridge', 'CPU': 'Toshiba TLCS900H @ 6.144 MHz', 'Sound': 'Z80 & SN76489 compatible', 'Power': 'Two AAA batteries for 40 hours of play, CR2032 for backup memory and clock', 'Successor': 'Neo Geo Pocket Color'}