21772,
NeutralpointofviewExamplesDebate,
Topic 1
Darwin's theory of natural selection is the best available explanation of the diversity of life we see today.
My answer - not - MB
and my - yes. We should limit NPOV if we don't want to end with "Earth is considered to be round by majority, but some people claim it's flat")
It is a fact that some people believe the Earth is flat. What is wrong with noting that, providing a link to an article on "flat-earthers" and moving on? I would rephrase the sentence as you have put it, but I don't see anything wrong with it. - MB
What is wrong is that it would be pissing all physicists/astronomers/scientists/etc and it isn't any better than presenting
round-earth as a fact (plus maybe a foonote about some "flat-earth")
The same with evolution. It's a fact. Why would we want to piss all biologists/scientists/etc. by stating otherwise ? User:Taw
I think we need to consider that wikipedia articles about evolution will in the future br reviwed by an expert. Such expert will not consider that creationism deserves any atention in such an article. But he would mention panspermia. I think that, in scientific subjects, we should adopt a PV of a Science or Nature editor.  user:joao
I fully agree with user:joao. User:Taw
I am not convinced.  The majority of humans believe in some kind of supernatural activity in the formation of what is, not all of them are christians, and not all of them are stupid.  We should at the very least characterize the popularity of such beliefs, and attempt to clarify the debate.  To consider that the majority of people are just so stupid that their veiws deserve no mention is just weird and certianly is not NPOV.
Fortunatelly majority of people doesn't believe in either flat Earth or creationism.
If a lot of people believed in some theory that is clearly against science and well-established scientific theories,
it should of course be mentioned, but it should not appear on the same rights as proper scientific theories. User:Taw
It is the random and purposless clause of most descriptions of evolution which are rejected by a large majority of americans (where the subject is most controversial) and the majority people in the world.  There is significant survey data out there to back up this claim. Certianly you are correct that most folks and most scientists reject creationism, but most consider it likely that there is some kind of purposive activity behind the world they see around them.  I don't buy your theory, and I have a real problem with your solution.  There is lots and lots of debate on talk:creationism and you should read it, think about it, and respond to it, rather than going off on your own to try to make a new wikipedia policy.  -- (not attributed)
Personally, I would find this go too far, but would be ok with:
Darwin's theory of natural selection is considered the best available explanation of the diversity of life we see today.
By the way, even as a statement about the current biological theory, this might be too simplistic to be considered right - there are a number of important factors apart from natural selection: genetic drift and specification through geographical isolation, to name two. But that's not really important to this debate, I guess. -- User:Andre Engels
This page is pretty stale, but I felt like chiming in anyway :)  I think the problem is the word "best" can pretty much never be NPOV. What do you mean by best? Do you mean it is the best fit for the known facts, or the best explanation? Or do you mean it's the best put-together? Or do you mean it's the best for the good of society as a whole? Some of these notions are more subjective than others.
The sentence has another problem that Andre Engels noted: Darwin's theory of Natural Selection is *not* the same as current mainstream science's. Most scientists today would not consider Darwin's theory to be the best in any way, but would consider some of the more refined versions we have today to be the best available. I'm not sure whether this problem should be considered a NPOV problem or just a factual error, but either way, be careful people! PenguiN42 17:53, 12 Apr 2004 (UTC)
Topic 2
Darwin's theory of natural selection is the most widely accepted scientific explanation of the diversity of life we see today. - acceptable or not? 
(My answer - acceptable, even Creationists would have to agree with this statement.)  - MB
(No they would not - see any creationist/intelligent design website or book. A creationist would argue that this is not NPOV. User:John Lynch) 
(Sorry, John, but any creationist who disagrees with the statement that evolution is "the most widely accepted..." is a liar. It is accepted, whether or not it happens to be true. Coverage of minority arguments and opinions is welcome here; dishonesty and deceit are not. --LDC). 
I am in total agreement with LDC. John you arguing that this statement is not neutral - but how can you honestly say that Creationism is a "more widely accepted  scientific model" than evolution. I'm perfectly happy to accept that you think evolution is wrong, but that's not what is being stated. It is a fact that creationism IS a minority viewpoint. Consider this example: I happen to believe that all of science is based on axioms of faith. LDC is my chief opponent on this subject. However - I can see that my viewpoint is the minority one, and I can accept that. My viewpoint has been fairly reported, and its minority status noted, so I am happy.-- MB
I don't argue this. Obviously as an evolutionary biologist and historian of same, I wouldn't. But - there are people who do, and who would invoke an NPOV ruling. We're getting to a point here that is beyond the creation/evolution issue. It's about encyclopedias - or for that matter any text. I'm definitely not a postmodernism but I'm willing to state that no text/narrative can be NPOV - even the scientific papers I have published. User:John Lynch
I happen to agree with John on this one; complete objectivity is not possible. I would even go so far as to say that a pretense of objectivity can be harmful in itself--much news coverage has that problem. But I think it is possible in this medium to be both fact-stating and minimally controversial, in that most biases are toward the majority viewpoint, and minority viewpoints are mentioned and treated reasonably. I think this can be done, and an encyclopedia is one place where it should be.  --LDC
(Hmm.  So what is the most widely accepted scientific explanation?  Kind of depends on what you mean by scientific, but saying it's the most widely accepted isn't the same as saying it's true, or even plausible  User:Verloren)
I think the fact that scientific is in bold makes this NPOV.  Perhaps being a scientific explanation or origins is the most important thing, or perhaps it is not.  Certainly people will disagree on that subject. 
Ok so here are some really hard ones, you tell me fact or opinion:
NPOV and accuracy
I'm trying to get across a point here, and I'm not sure if I'm being clear.  The problem is that some people think the above is NPOV, since it presents Newtonian theory as a fact, and others (myself included) are pragmatically disposed to saying that it is a fact (except in some non-standard (for humans) situations).  There are lots of controversial issues in epistemology and philosophy of science at stake here, and if we privilege either side we'll piss people off.  But I'm not certain we can entirely avoid privileging one side or the other, unless we raise the bar for who can contribute to only those with a very high degree of philosophical sophistication.  So what are we to do?  I'm not sure this is as easy a question as some other folks seem to think. User:MRC
The Fact/Opinion Dichotomy
I object to the fact/opinion dichotomy on the main page.  Think about it: It is either a fact that God exists, or it is a fact that God does not exist.  One can be of two opinions about which fact to believe, or one can withhold judgment.  Perhaps the distinction you want to make is between irrefutable facts, and those facts about which there is some disagreement.
I aggree with the first editor that the Fact/Opinion Dichotomy is unhelpful. I think, MB, if we are trying to get clear on "a neutral point of view" for wikipedia we would be better served by the dichotomy: description V prescription; or empirical V normative; or is V ought. I can have an opinion about factual claims, as mentioned about whether god exists. I can also have an opinion about what ought be, for example, that religion ought disappear from the face of the earth. JB
And, yes, opinions about what is include judgements about the extent and depth of opinions. For example, I have an opinion that most people in the world believe in god. Someone else may have the contrary opinion: that most people in the world have an opinion that there is no god. JB
I'd suggest it's a unhelpful to take 'fact' to designate a critically high level of confidence about our opinions. I can have a critically high level of confidence about my opinions on what ought be, eg that rape ought not occur, without this being a claim about facts. That is, without this being a claim about what is. JB
With this dichotomy, is V ought, we might then have as a general policy: "Wikipedia Articles should be about what is rather than about what ought be." JB
Next, and this is important to be seperated, there is the issue of the support for the factual opinion. Some opinions about fact are so well supported, by evidence and reason, that we can be confident about their truth. Like that the earth is round. So I'm not espousing a truth subjectivism here: that there is no truth and only mere opinion. JB
"Evolution" is a reference to the past. "Flat Earth" is a reference to the present. Do not lump them together!
Perhaps the past is unverifiable, but the present is verifiable. So... either Japan's solar time is roughly half a day out of phase with USA solar time, or there is one COLOSSAL conspiracy!!
Maybe the earth was flat in the past and evolution started just five minutes ago. Also the present is basically unverifiable as the past is. I think MB is right, evolution is the best scientific model for diversity of life and thus a scientific fact. --User:Vulture
Alright.  I'm starting the entry.  Flat earth.
I remember a Bad Religion song called "Flat earth Society". Is this a common english idiom? (This might belong on talk:Flat earth ?)
Perhaps one obstacle to attaining NPOV is the desire of intelligent, well-read, responisible people to set those ignorant #@&*@ straight. Who do they think they are, filling this 'pedia with garbage?!
A more arduous but ultimately more successful strategy may be to "acknowledge" diverse viewpoints (i.e., sheer lunacy, insincere polemics) while giving thorough treatment to the "right" point of view.
It worked on the Lucifer thing. It might work on Flat Earth. It could even work someday on the evolution-creationism debate, where I'm one of the lunatics, ahem, dissenters. 
Just a thought. User:Ed Poor


