21756,
NorthernSotholanguage,

Northern Sotho, or Sesotho sa Leboa as an endonym, is a Sotho-Tswana language spoken in the northeastern provinces of South Africa. It is sometimes referred to as Sepedi or Pedi, its main dialect, through synecdoche.
According to the South African National Census of 2011, it is the first language of over 4.6 million (9.1%) people, making it the 5th most spoken language in South Africa. The Sepedi language is spoken most commonly in Mpumalanga, Gauteng and the Limpopo provinces.[4]
The Northern Sotho written language was based largely on the Sepedi dialect.  Missionaries studied this dialect the most closely and first developed the orthography in 1860 by Alexander Merensky, Grutzner and Gerlachshoop.[5]  This subsequently provided a common writing system for 20 or more varieties of the Sotho-Tswana languages spoken in the former Transvaal, and also helped lead to "Sepedi" being used as the umbrella term for the entire language family.  However, there are objections to this synecdoche by other Northern Sotho dialect speakers, such as speakers of the Modjadji's Lobedu dialect.[citation needed]
Northern Sotho can be subdivided into Highveld-Sotho, which consists of comparatively recent immigrants mostly from the west and southwest parts of South Africa, and Lowveld-Sotho, which consists of a combination of immigrants from the north of South Africa and Sotho inhabitants of longer standing. Like other Sotho-Tswana people their languages are named after totemic animals and, sometimes, by alternating or combining these with the names of famous chiefs.[original research?]
The group consists of the following dialects:
The group consists of the Lobedu, Narene, Phalaborwa (Malatji), Mogoboya, Kone, Kgaga, Pulana, Pai, and Kutswe.
Before Moshoeshoe and his Basotho nation of Lesotho, the Basotho people occupied the area. Moshoeshoe didn't found Basotho, but he founded a country made up of Sesotho-speaking people from different Sesotho-speaking clans that the British imperialists in Southern Africa erroneously called the Basotho nation, cutting them off from the rest of other Basothos outside Lesotho in the Orange Free State and Transvaal (present-day South Africa and Botswana). Moshoeshoe, the son of Mokhachane of another Basotho clan of the Bamokoteli clan, united the smaller and vulnerable families of Basothos under his Bakwena clan leadership during the Shaka wars of difaqane after other Basothos migrated to different directions from Ntswanatsatsi. 
Under different leadership, they dispersed among present-day North West Province, Free State and Lesotho, Botswana, Zambia, and Gauteng; this led to the birth of the Bakgatla, which gave birth to Northern Sotho and then different Northern clans with dialects like BaPedi, Batlokwa, Babirwa, etc. They moved next to and mingled with Swatis, Vendas, Tsongas and Ngunis, which also influenced the linguisitc development of the region. Also, some of the Northern Basotho have a common denominator of "apa" (meaning talk) with Balovedu, BaGubu and Babirwa of Bobirwa in the Southern part of Botswana.  
Northern Sotho is one of the Sotho languages of the Bantu family. Although Northern Sotho shares the name Sotho with Southern Sotho, the two groups have less in common with each other than they have with Setswana.[citation needed][6] Northern Sotho is also closely related to Setswana, sheKgalagari and siLozi. It is a standardised dialect, amalgamating several distinct varieties or dialects. Northern Sotho is also spoken by the Mohlala people.
Most Khelobedu speakers only learn to speak Sepedi at school, such that Sepedi is only their second or third language. Khelobedu is a written language. Lobedu is spoken by a majority of people in the Greater Tzaneen, Greater Letaba, and BaPhalaborwa municipalities, and a minority in Greater Giyani municipality, as well as in the Limpopo Province and Tembisa township in Gauteng. Its speakers are known as the Balobedu.
Sepulana (also sePulane) exists in unwritten form and forms part of the standard Northern Sotho. Sepulana is spoken in Bushbuckridge area by the MaPulana people.
Sepedi is written in the Latin alphabet. The letter š is used to represent the sound [ʃ] ("sh" is used in the trigraph "tsh" to represent an aspirated ts sound). The circumflex accent can be added to the letters e and o to distinguish their different sounds, but it is mostly used in language reference books. Some word prefixes, especially in verbs, are written separately from the stem.[7]
Within nasal consonant compounds, the first nasal consonant sound is recognized as syllabic. Words such as nthuše "help me", are pronounced as [n̩tʰuʃe]. /n/ can also be pronounced as /ŋ/ following a velar consonant.[8]
Urban varieties of Northern Sotho, such as Pretoria Sotho (actually a derivative of Tswana), have acquired clicks in an ongoing process of such sounds spreading from Nguni languages.[9]
Some examples of Sepedi words and phrases:
amogela ( tshelete/.../...)?



Information box
{'Pronunciation': '/sɛˈpɛdi/', 'Native to': 'South Africa', 'Region': 'Gauteng, Limpopo, parts of Mpumalanga', 'Ethnicity': 'Pedi', 'Native speakers': '4.7 million (2011 census)[1]\n9.1 million L2 speakers (2002)[2]', 'Language family': 'Niger–Congo?\nAtlantic–Congo\nVolta-Congo\nBenue–Congo\nBantoid\nSouthern Bantoid\nBantu\nSouthern Bantu\nSotho–Tswana\nSepedi', 'Standard forms': 'Sepedi', 'Writing system': 'Latin (Northern Sotho alphabet)\nSotho Braille', 'Signed forms': 'Signed Pedi', 'Official language in': ' South Africa', 'Regulated by': 'Pan South African Language Board', 'ISO 639-2': 'nso', 'ISO 639-3': 'nso', 'Glottolog': 'pedi1238  Northern Sotho', 'Guthrie code': 'S.32,301–304[3]', 'Linguasphere': '99-AUT-ed', 'Person': 'Mopedi', 'People': 'Bapedi', 'Language': 'Sepedi', 'Country': 'Bopedi'}