21810,
NorthernMichiganUniversity,

Northern Michigan University (Northern Michigan, Northern or NMU) is a public university in Marquette, Michigan. It was established in 1899 by the Michigan Legislature as Northern State Normal School. In 1963, the state designated Northern a university and gave the school its current name of Northern Michigan University.
The university comprises five academic divisions, offering some 180 programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels.[2] Accredited undergraduate and graduate degree programs are offered by the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Business, the College of Health Sciences and Professional Studies.
NMU's athletic teams are nicknamed the Wildcats and compete primarily in the NCAA Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). The hockey team competes in NCAA Division I Central Collegiate Hockey Association. The Nordic ski team competes in the NCAA Central Collegiate Ski Association.
Northern Michigan University was established in 1899 by the Michigan Legislature as Northern State Normal School to offer teacher preparation programs in Michigan's then-wild and sparsely populated Upper Peninsula. When it opened in 1899, NMU enrolled thirty-two students who were taught by six faculty members in rented rooms in Marquette city hall.[3] The original 20-acre (81,000 m2) campus site at the corner of Presque Isle and Kaye Avenues was on land donated by local businessman and philanthropist John M. Longyear, whose namesake academic building, Longyear Hall, opened in 1900.[4]
Throughout the school's first half-century, education and teacher training was the school's primary focus. During this time, the school built the native sandstone buildings Kaye and Peter White Halls, as well as a manual training school next to the campus buildings, J.D. Pierce School. Modest enrollment increases led to several name changes:
In 1963, through the adoption of a new state constitution in Michigan, Northern Michigan was designated a comprehensive university serving the diverse educational needs of Upper Michigan. During this time, enrollment grew, due in large part to the 1957 opening of the Mackinac Bridge that links the Upper and Lower Peninsulas. Accredited undergraduate and graduate degree programs are offered by the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Business, the College of Health Sciences and Professional Studies.
Graduate education began in March 1935 when courses at the master's degree level were offered in cooperation with the University of Michigan.[7]
NMU is considered "selective" by U.S. News & World Report.[14] For the Class of 2025 (enrolling Fall 2021), NMU received 6,553 applications and accepted 4,670 (71.3%), with 1,496 enrolling.
The enrolled first-year class of 2023 had the following standardized test scores: the middle 50% range (25th percentile-75th percentile) of SAT scores was 980-1180, while the middle 50% range of ACT scores was 20-26.
180 Undergraduate and graduate degree programs are offered at NMU.[15]
NMU has five academic divisions:
Northern's most popular undergraduate majors, by 2021 graduates, were:[16]
Northern Michigan University is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission.
All education programs are accredited by the Teacher Education Accreditation Council (TEAC). Other accreditations include the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology; American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance; American Chemical Society; American Society of Cytology; Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Professionals (Surgical Technology); Committee on Accreditation for Respiratory Care of the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs; Council on Social Work Education; Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration Certification; International Association of Counseling Services, Inc.; Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology; Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulation, State Board of Nursing; National Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences; and the National Association of Schools of Music.
In addition, the nursing programs (practical nursing, baccalaureate, and master's degrees) are fully approved by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulation, State Board of Nursing and the baccalaureate and master's degrees are fully accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE).[17]
The baccalaureate degree programs of the Walker L. Cisler College of Business are accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.[18]
NMU is a tobacco-free campus.[19]
Instructional Spaces
Ten buildings where classes are held having at least 210 instructional spaces. There are 3 distance learning facilities, the largest of which is Mead Auditorium which seats 100.
Art and Design
Berry Events Center
Cohodas Hall
Forest Roberts Theatre
Gries Hall
CB Hedgcock Building
Jamrich Hall
Lydia M. Olson Library
McClintock Hall
Physical Education Instructional Facility
Seaborg Science Complex
Superior Dome
The Jacobetti Center
Whitman Hall
Northern Michigan University's eight-member governing board, the Board of Trustees, is appointed by the Governor of Michigan and confirmed by the Michigan Senate for an eight-year term. The Board of Trustees has general supervision of the institution, the control and direction of all expenditures from the institution's funds, and such other powers and duties as prescribed by law. It also has the authority to hire and evaluate the university president, who reports directly to the board. Members of the Board of Trustees serve without compensation, but are reimbursed by the University for expenses related to Board duties.[34]
NMU's Wildcats compete in the NCAA's Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference in basketball, football, golf, cross country, soccer, volleyball, track & field, and swimming/diving. The hockey program competes in Division I as a member of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association. The Nordic ski team competes in the Central Collegiate Ski Association. The Division II football team plays in the world's largest wooden dome, the Superior Dome.[35] Lloyd Carr, former head coach at the University of Michigan, former NFL coach Jerry Glanville, and Steve Mariucci, former head coach of the Detroit Lions and San Francisco 49ers and Robert Saleh, current head coach of the New York Jets, played football for NMU, and current Michigan State coach Tom Izzo played basketball at NMU. Northern Michigan's rivals in sports action are the two other major schools in the Upper Peninsula: Michigan Technological University, and Lake Superior State University.[36]
The winner of the annual football game between NMU and Michigan Tech is awarded the Miner's Cup.
The United States Olympic Training Site on the campus of Northern Michigan University is one of 16 Olympic training sites in the country.  The NMU-OTS provides secondary and post-secondary educational opportunities for athletes while offering world-class training.
With more than 70 resident athletes and coaches, the NMU-OTS is the second-largest Olympic training center in the United States, in terms of residents, behind Colorado Springs. The USOEC has more residential athletes than the Lake Placid and Chula Vista sites combined. Over the years, it has grown into a major contributor to the U.S. Olympic movement.
Current resident training programs include Greco-Roman wrestling and weightlifting. Athletes must be approved by the NMU-OTS, their national governing body and NMU to be admitted into the program.
NMU-OTS athletes attend NMU while training in their respective sports, and are officially recognized as NMU varsity athletes. The student athletes receive free or reduced room and board, access to training facilities as well as sports medicine and sports science services, academic tutoring, and a waiver of out-of-state tuition fees by NMU. Although athletes are responsible for tuition at the in-state rate, they may receive the B.J. Stupak Scholarship to help cover expenses.[37]
On-campus NMU-OTS athletes live in NMU's  Meyland Hall, eat in campus dining halls, and train at the university's Superior Dome.
The NMU-OTS also offers a variety of short-term training camps; regional, national, and international competitions; coaches and officials education clinics; and an educational program for retired Olympians.[38]
The on campus residence halls include:[39]
In addition to the residence halls, NMU operates and maintains four apartment buildings on campus.
The apartments are [40]
NMU hosts a large number of student organizations which are governmental, academic, programming, social, religious, and athletic, as well as residence hall-related, in nature. There are over 300 registered student organizations that provide programs and activities for the campus community.
NMU hosts the United States Army Cadet Command's "Wildcat Battalion".[41] Roughly 70 Cadets train to earn their commissions as United States Army Officers in both the Active Duty and Reserve components.
The North Wind began in 1972 as Northern Michigan University's second independent, student newspaper. The university's first newspaper was The Northern News, which was shut down due to published articles throughout the 1960s that painted the school in an unflattering manner. In 2015, a controversy arose between the school's administration and members of the North Wind staff, which reached federal court on claims of first amendment violations before the case was dismissed. The weekly paper covers news from the university and community alike and prints on most Wednesdays during the school year.[42]
WUPX is Northern Michigan University's non-commercial, student run, radio station broadcasting at 91.5 FM.  WUPX provides NMU Students and the Marquette area with a wide variety of music, event announcements, and activities.[43]
NMU operates seven charter schools throughout Michigan.[52]
As of July 1, 2014, NMU added three more charter schools:  Frances Reh Academy in Saginaw, George Crockett Academy in Detroit and East Shore Leadership Academy in Port Huron.



Information box
{'Former names': 'Northern State Normal (1899–1927)\nNorthern State Teachers College (1927–1942)\nNorthern Michigan College of Education (1942–1955)\nNorthern Michigan College (1955–1963)', 'Type': 'Public university', 'Established': '1899; 124 years ago', 'Endowment': '$15.4 million (2019)[1]', 'Academic staff': '457', 'Students': '6,764', 'Undergraduates': '6,207 (Winter 2018)', 'Postgraduates': '557 (Winter 2018)', 'Location': 'Marquette, Michigan, United States\n46°33′32″N 87°24′19″W', 'Campus': 'Small city, 350 acres (1.4 km2)', 'Colors': 'Green and Gold\n   ', 'Nickname': 'Wildcats', 'Sporting affiliations': "NCAA Division II (primary)\nNCAA Division I, men's hockey", 'Mascot': 'Wildcat Willy', 'Website': 'www.nmu.edu'}