21445,
November,
November is the eleventh and penultimate month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars, the fourth and last of four months to have a length of 30 days and the fifth and last of five months to have a length of fewer than 31 days. November was the ninth month of the calendar of Romulus c. 750 BC. November retained its name (from the Latin novem meaning "nine") when January and February were added to the Roman calendar.
November is a month of late spring in the Southern Hemisphere and late autumn in the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, November in the Southern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent of May in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa. In Ancient Rome, Ludi Plebeii was held from November 4–17, Epulum Jovis was held on November 13 and Brumalia celebrations began on November 24. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.
November was referred to as Blōtmōnaþ by the Anglo-Saxons. Brumaire and Frimaire were the months on which November fell in the French Republican calendar. 
November meteor showers include the Andromedids, which occurs from September 25 to December 6 and generally peak around November 9–14, the Leonids, which occurs from November 15–20, the Alpha Monocerotids, which occurs from November 15–25 with the peak on November 21–22, the Northern Taurids, which occurs from October 20 to December 10, and the Southern Taurids, which occurs from September 10 – November 20, and the Phoenicids; which occur from November 29 to December 9 with the peak occurring on December 5–6. The Orionids, which occurs in late October, sometimes lasts into November.
The Western zodiac signs for November are Scorpio (October 23 – November 21) and Sagittarius (November 22 – December 21).[1][2]
This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.
(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)
First Sunday
First Monday
Tuesday after the first Monday
First Wednesday
First Thursday
First Friday
First Saturday
Second Sunday
Week of November 8
Week of November 11
Second Monday:
'Second Saturday
Third Sunday:
Third week
Third Monday
Weekdays of the third week
Wednesday of the third week
Third Thursday
Third Friday
Third Friday until the next Monday
Saturday before Fourth Thursday
Last Week
Day before fourth Thursday
Last Wednesday
Fourth Thursday
Day after fourth Thursday
Fourth Saturday
Saturday after Thanksgiving
Fourth Sunday
Last Sunday
Monday after fourth Thursday in November


