37207,
Nuclearengineering,
Nuclear engineering is the engineering discipline concerned with the design and application of systems that make use of the energy released by nuclear processes.[1][2]
The most prominent application of nuclear engineering is the generation of electricity. Wordwide, some 440 nuclear reactors in 32 countries generate 10 percent of the world's energy through nuclear fission.[3] In the future, it is expected that nuclear fusion will add another nuclear means of generating energy.[4] Both reactions make use of the nuclear binding energy released when atomic nucleons are either separated (fission) or brought together (fusion). The energy available is given by the binding energy curve, and the amount generated is much greater than that generated through chemical reactions. Fission of 1 gram of uranium yields as much energy as burning 3 tons of coal or 600 gallons of fuel oil,[5] without adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.[6]
Nuclear engineers work in such areas as the following:[7][8][9]
Many chemical, electrical and mechanical and other types of engineers also work in the nuclear industry, as do many scientists and support staff. In the U.S., nearly 100,000 people directly work in the nuclear industry. Including secondary sector jobs, the number of people supported by the U.S. nuclear industry is 475,000.[15]
An argument can be made that nuclear engineering was born in 1938, with the discovery of nuclear fission.[16] However, from the engineering perspective of applying science to create something new, a more fitting beginning might be 1942, when Chicago Pile-1 (CP-1) began operating at the University of Chicago as a part of the Manhattan Project. The first artificial nuclear reactor, CP-1 was designed by a team of physicists who were concerned that Nazi Germany might also be seeking to build a bomb based on nuclear fission. (The earliest known nuclear reaction on Earth occurred naturally, 1.7 billion years ago, in Oklo, Gabon, Africa.) The second artificial nuclear reactor, the X-10 Graphite Reactor was also a part of the Manhattan Project, as were the plutonium-producing reactors of the Hanford Engineer Works.
The first nuclear reactor to generate electricity was Experimental Breeder Reactor I (EBR-I), which did so near Arco, Idaho, in 1951.[17] EBR-I was a standalone facility, not connected to a grid, but a later Idaho research reactor in the BORAX series did briefly supply power to the town of Arco in 1955.
The first commercial nuclear power plant, built to be connected to an electrical grid, is the Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant, which began operation in 1954. The second appears to be the Shippingport Atomic Power Station, which produced electricity in 1957.
For a brief chronology, from the discovery of uranium to the current era, see Outline History of Nuclear Energy or History of Nuclear Power.
See List of Commercial Nuclear Reactors for a comprehensive listing of nuclear power reactors and IAEA Power Reactor Information System (PRIS) for worldwide and country-level statistics on nuclear power generation.
In the United States, nuclear engineers are employed as follows:[18]
Worldwide, job prospects for nuclear engineers are likely best in those countries that are active in or exploring nuclear technologies:
Nuclear Engineering Seibersdorf GmbH (NES) for pre-disposal management including
treatment, conditioning and interim storage of low- and intermediate level radioactive waste (LILW)."[19] Nuclear Engineering Seibersdorf GmbH (NES) collects, processes, conditions, and stores radioactive waste and does decontamination and decommissioning of nuclear facilities for the Republic of Austria.[20]
Nuclear Power in Canada.
Organizations that provide study and training in nuclear engineering include the following:
North China Electric Power University and North China Electric Power University.
Tsinghua University and Tsinghua University.
National Polytechnic University of Armenia
Republic of Armenia
Baku State University, Republic of Azerbaijan
Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics, Republic of Belarus
Belarusian National Technical University, Republic of Belarus
Belarusian State University, Republic of Belarus
L.N. Gumilev Eurasian National University, Republic of Kazakhstan
Sarsen Amanzholov East Kazakhstan State University, Republic of Kazakhstan
D. Serikbayev East Kazakhstan Technical University (EKTU), Republic of Kazakhstan
AGH University of Science and Technology (Akademia Górniczo-Hutnicza im. Stanisława Staszica w Krakowie), Republic of Poland
National Research Nuclear University «MEPhI», Russian Federation
Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University n.a. R.E. Alekseev, Russian Federation
The National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russian Federation
Odessa National Polytechnic University (OPNU), Ukraine
Samarkand State University, Republic of Uzbekistan
The IAEA also provides guidance for nuclear engineering curricula: https://www-pub.iaea.org/mtcd/publications/pdf/pub1626web-52229977.pdf
https://www.nuclear.sci.waseda.ac.jp/index_en.html
https://tpu.ru/en/about/department_links_and_administration/department/view/?id=7863
http://nukbilimler.ankara.edu.tr/en/nuclear-research-and-technologies-department/
http://www.nuce.boun.edu.tr/
University of Birmingham
University of Bristol
University of Cambridge
University of Central Lancashire
University of Cumbria
Defence Academy of the United Kingdom
University of Dundee
Imperial College London
Lancaster University
University of Leeds
University of Liverpool
The University of Manchester
Nottingham Trent University
Nuclear Technology Education Consortium (NTEC)
The Open University
University of Sheffield
University of Surrey
University of the West of Scotland
Air Force Institute of Technology
Abilene Christian University
Clemson University
Colorado School of Mines
Georgia Institute of Technology
Idaho State University
Kansas State University
Louisiana State University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Missouri University of Science and Technology
North Carolina State University
Ohio State University
Oregon State University
Penn State University
Purdue University
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
South Carolina State University
Texas A&M University
United States Military Academy at West Point
University of California, Berkeley
University of Florida
University of Idaho
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Maryland
University of Massachusetts Lowell
University of Michigan
University of Missouri
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
University of New Mexico
University of Pittsburgh
University of South Carolina
University of Tennessee
University of Texas
University of Utah
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Virginia Commonwealth University
Virginia Tech


