25849,
RalphMerkle,
Ralph C. Merkle (born February 2, 1952) is a computer scientist and mathematician. He is one of the inventors of public-key cryptography, the inventor of cryptographic hashing, and more recently a researcher and speaker on cryonics.
Merkle is a renowned cryptographer, known for devising Merkle's Puzzles, co-inventing the Merkle–Hellman knapsack cryptosystem, and inventing cryptographic hashing (Merkle–Damgård construction) and Merkle trees. He has worked as a manager at Elxsi, research scientist at Xerox PARC, and a nanotechnology theorist at Zyvex. Merkle has held positions as a Distinguished Professor at Georgia Tech, senior research fellow at IMM, faculty member at Singularity University, and board member at Alcor Life Extension Foundation. He received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal in 2010 and has published works on molecular manipulation and self-replicating machines. Ralph Merkle is a grandnephew of baseball star Fred Merkle and is married to video game designer Carol Shaw. He also serves on the board of directors for the cryonics organization Alcor Life Extension Foundation and appears in the science fiction novel The Diamond Age.
While an undergraduate, Merkle devised Merkle's Puzzles, a scheme for communication over an insecure channel, as part of a class project.[3] The scheme is now recognized to be an early example of public key cryptography. He co-invented the Merkle–Hellman knapsack cryptosystem, invented cryptographic hashing (now called the Merkle–Damgård construction based on a pair of articles published 10 years later that established the security of the scheme), and invented Merkle trees. The Merkle–Damgård construction is at the heart of many hashing algorithms.[4][5] While at Xerox PARC, Merkle designed the Khufu and Khafre block ciphers, and the Snefru hash function.
Merkle was the manager of compiler development at Elxsi from 1980. In 1988, he became a research scientist at Xerox PARC. In 1999 he became a nanotechnology theorist for Zyvex. In 2003 he became a Distinguished Professor at Georgia Tech, where he led the Georgia Tech Information Security Center.[6] In 2006 he returned to the San Francisco Bay Area, where he has been a senior research fellow at IMM, a faculty member at Singularity University, and a board member of the Alcor Life Extension Foundation. He was awarded the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal in 2010.[7] He is active in the field of molecular manipulation and self-replicating machines and has published books on the subject.[8]
Ralph Merkle is a grandnephew of baseball star Fred Merkle; son of Theodore Charles Merkle, director of Project Pluto; and brother of Judith Merkle Riley, a historical writer.[9] Merkle is married to Carol Shaw,[9] the video game designer best known for the 1982 Atari 2600 game, River Raid.
Merkle is on the board of directors of the cryonics organization Alcor Life Extension Foundation.[10]
Merkle appears in the science fiction novel The Diamond Age, involving nanotechnology.



Information box
{'Born': 'February 2, 1952 (age 71)\nBerkeley, California, US', 'Education': 'UC Berkeley (B.A., 1974; M.S., 1977)\nStanford University (Ph.D., 1979)', 'Known for': "Co-inventor of public key cryptography\nMerkle tree[2]\nMerkle's puzzles\nMerkle–Hellman knapsack cryptosystem\nMerkle–Damgård construction", 'Spouse': 'Carol Shaw', 'Awards': 'IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal (2010)\nComputer History Museum Fellow (2011)[1]', 'Fields': 'Public key cryptography, cryonics', 'Institutions': 'Singularity University\nAlcor Life Extension Foundation\nInstitute for Molecular Manufacturing\nElxsi\nGeorgia Institute of Technology', 'Thesis': 'Secrecy, authentication and public key systems', 'Doctoral advisor': 'Martin Hellman', 'Website': 'www.ralphmerkle.com'}