40297,
ReferencedeskMiscellaneous,

Main page: Help searching Wikipedia
   
How can I get my question answered?


How do I answer a question?
Main page: Wikipedia:Reference desk/Guidelines
Myself and Tails Wx have been creating an article about tornadoes in 1945 and came across a source from the United States Weather Bureau saying a tornado struck “Lovell, Florida” on March 20, 1945. After searching, I found that Lowell, Florida exists, but also there seems to be a school and a few businesses with “Lovell” as part of their name near Orlando. I haven’t been able to find if an unincorporated community ever existed in Florida under the name “Lovell”. Any help would be appreciated! I also can’t necessarily check with the US Weather Bureau to see if it was a typo since this document was also from 1945 and the modern day National Weather Service only keeps records starting in 1950. The Weather Event Writer (Talk Page) 00:03, 30 June 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Is there any free fantasy modern-style mapping site for personal use? At least on OpenStreetMap software, like OpenGeofiction, would be good such site if exists. --40bus (talk) 18:46, 30 June 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Are there Hindu Monotheists? What is their history? Are they followers of Sikhism or are they a separate group?
Thanks. 2A10:8012:F:F548:69D6:D35E:8662:340 (talk) 19:55, 30 June 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Marian devotions are external pious practices directed to the person of Mary, mother of God, by members of certain Christian traditions. They are performed in Catholicism, High Church Lutheranism, Anglo-Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy, but generally rejected in other Christian denominations.The word "worship" does not appear in the definition.   That said, I learned yesterday that in the Roman Catholic church 2 July (which I just this second noticed is today) is the feast day of the "Visitation of the Blessed Virgin."   What's the backstory there? 2A00:23A8:0:3D01:B146:4391:37DC:D954 (talk) 11:20, 2 July 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
I'm intrigued by the increasing prevalence of trigger warnings on television news reports. Certainly in Australia, but I can't speak for elsewhere. It seems that at least 3 times a week I see these things now (and I'm not a huge TV watcher, but I do like to keep abreast of current events). 
I don't quibble with any of the individual warnings, but I'm left wondering why Story A qualifies for one while Story B, which contains equally graphic and potentially upsetting content, does not. Just about every day there are reports of yet another "horror" road smash or mass shooting or natural disaster with massive fatalities - all of these are bound to trigger some people but they escape the trigger warnings. Many political developments here and elsewhere should qualify.  (Hell, even a single mention of Donald Trump, or Harry and Meghan's latest doings, or the latest "celebrity wedding of the century" sends me insane, but I'm not catered for. Reports of Paris Hilton's and Lindsay Lohan's flirtations with the law used to do it for me. Whenever I hear that someone has "taken the world by storm", I throw up my lunch.)
OK, I'm getting whimsical now but my core question remains: what sorts of issues qualify for trigger warnings, and why only them?--  Jack of Oz [pleasantries] 22:48, 1 July 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
What depressed people did before tv and radio were invented?
Using computers, smarthphones and tv seems to be a pretty deal among people with depression, what they did before those things existed?
179.134.97.75 (talk) 17:42, 2 July 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
"This expansion means that light from ancient cosmic events must travel increasingly longer distances to reach Earth, and therefore takes more time to arrive. As a result, cosmic events that are extremely distant or far back in time appear to unfold more slowly compared to the same event happening nearby, right now. That isn’t to say the early universe was in slow motion, however – anyone present billions of years ago would have seen time evolving normally." - NewScientist.
I was under impression that the light only gets red shifted due to expanding space. Article mentions early universe was not in slow motion, and later (earliest quasar) appeared to run five times more slowly than quasars from today.
What I am missing? manya (talk) 08:23, 5 July 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]
Does anyone know the actual story behind how this came to be a thing? I've read that someone on the town's council commissioned "a statue to represent Vandam", or something like that and the sculptor misunderstood the instruction and made this bronze JCVD statue. Then the people responsible were then like "eh, we paid for it already, might as well put it somewhere". Iloveparrots (talk) 02:38, 7 July 2023 (UTC)Reply[reply]


