5435,
RoyalCambodianArmedForces,

The Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (កងយោធពលខេមរភូមិន្ទ, RCAF) is Cambodia's national military force. The Supreme Commander-in-Chief is King Norodom Sihamoni. Since 2018, General Vong Pisen has been the Commander-in-Chief of the RCAF as head of the Army, Navy, Air Force and the Gendarmerie.[1][2] The armed forces operate under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defence. Under the country's constitution, the RCAF is charged with protecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia.[3]
It was created in 1993 by a merger of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces (CPAF) and the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea (NADK) which included the Khmer Rouge, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia (Front uni national pour un Cambodge indépendant, neutre, pacifique, et coopératif, FUNCINPEC). The forerunner of the CPAF was the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (KPRAF), established in 1979 with support from the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN).[4]
The Royal Cambodian Army (RCA) is the largest RCAF branch, with troops stationed in each of the country's 25 provinces. The Royal Cambodian Navy (RCN), the second-largest branch and operates in the Gulf of Thailand, along the Mekong and Bassac rivers and in the Tonlé Sap lake. The Royal Cambodian Air Force (RCAF), the smallest service branch with 5,000 members, operates in every province which has an airport.[5]
The RCAF was established in 1993 after the democratic election of a government consisting of two prime ministers. The armed forces of all parties except the NADK were integrated into a national armed force. 
To resolve security problems, the government began a "Win-Win policy" in mid-1995 of national reconciliation and unity efforts under the Monarchy of Cambodia. Defections of NADK units began in early 1996 up until the death of Pol Pot in 1998.



Information box
{'Motto': 'ជាតិ សាសនា ព្រះមហាក្សត្រ\n(Nation Religion King)', 'Founded': '9 November 1953 (original)\n(69 years ago)', 'Current form': '24 September 1993\n(29 years ago)', 'Service branches': 'Royal Cambodian Gendarmerie\nRoyal Cambodian Army\nRoyal Cambodian Navy\nRoyal Cambodian Air Force', 'Headquarters': 'Phnom Penh, Cambodia', 'Supreme Commander': 'King Norodom Sihamoni\nPrime Minister Hun Sen', 'Commander-in-Chief': 'Vong Pisen', 'Minister of National Defence': 'Tea Banh', 'Chief of Defense': 'Hun Manet', 'Active personnel': '110,000', 'Budget': '$662 Million', 'Foreign suppliers': ' China\n Czech Republic\n North Korea\n Poland\n Russia\n Ukraine\n Vietnam', 'History': 'Military history of Cambodia', 'Ranks': 'Military ranks of the RCAF'}