29178,
Spaghetti,

Spaghetti (Italian: [spaˈɡetti]) is a long, thin, solid, cylindrical pasta.[1] It is a staple food of traditional Italian cuisine. Like other pasta, spaghetti is made of milled wheat, water, and sometimes enriched with vitamins and minerals. Italian spaghetti is typically made from durum-wheat semolina.[2] Usually the pasta is white because refined flour is used, but whole wheat flour may be added. Spaghettoni is a thicker form of spaghetti, while spaghettini is a thinner form. Capellini is a very thin spaghetti, sometimes known colloquially as "angel hair pasta", while Vermicelli refers to intermediate widths, varying between the United States and Italy.
Originally, spaghetti was notably long, but shorter lengths gained in popularity during the latter half of the 20th century and now it is most commonly available in 25–30 cm (10–12 in) lengths. A variety of pasta dishes are based on it and it is frequently served with tomato sauce, meat or vegetables.
Spaghetti is the plural form of the Italian word spaghetto, which is a diminutive of spago, meaning 'thin string' or 'twine'.[1]
The first written record of pasta comes from the Talmud in the 5th century AD and refers to dried pasta that could be cooked through boiling,[3] which was conveniently portable.[4] Some historians think that Arabs introduced pasta to Europe during a conquest of Sicily. In the West, it may have first been worked into long, thin forms in Sicily around the 12th century, as the Tabula Rogeriana of Muhammad al-Idrisi attested, reporting some traditions about the Sicilian kingdom.[5]
The popularity of spaghetti spread throughout Italy after the establishment of spaghetti factories in the 19th century, enabling the mass production of spaghetti for the Italian market.[6]
In the United States around the end of the 19th century, spaghetti was offered in restaurants as Spaghetti Italienne (which likely consisted of noodles cooked past al dente, and a mild tomato sauce flavored with easily found spices and vegetables such as cloves, bay leaves, and garlic) and it was not until decades later that it came to be commonly prepared with oregano or basil.[7][8][9]
Spaghetti is made from ground grain (flour) and water.[10] Whole-wheat and multigrain spaghetti are also available.[2]
At its simplest, imitation spaghetti can be formed using no more than a rolling pin and a knife. A home pasta machine simplifies the rolling and makes the cutting more uniform.[11] Although, of course cutting sheets produces pasta with a rectangular rather than a cylindrical cross-section and the result is a variant of fettuccine. Some pasta machines have a spaghetti attachment with circular holes that extrude spaghetti or shaped rollers that form cylindrical noodles.[citation needed]
Spaghetti can be made by hand by manually rolling a ball of dough on a surface to make a long sausage shape. The ends of the sausage are pulled apart to make a long thin sausage. The ends are brought together and the loop pulled to make two long sausages. The process is repeated until the pasta is sufficiently thin. The pasta knobs at each end are cut off leaving many strands which may be hung up to dry.[12]
Fresh spaghetti would normally be cooked within hours of being formed. Commercial versions of fresh spaghetti are manufactured.[13]
The bulk of dried spaghetti is produced in factories using auger extruders. While essentially simple, the process requires attention to detail to ensure that the mixing and kneading of the ingredients produces a homogeneous mix, without air bubbles. The forming dies have to be water cooled to prevent spoiling of the pasta by overheating. Drying of the newly formed spaghetti has to be carefully controlled to prevent strands sticking together, and to leave it with sufficient moisture so that it is not too brittle. Packaging for protection and display has developed from paper wrapping to plastic bags and boxes.[14]
A hydraulic press with an automatic spreader by the Consolidated Macaroni Machine Corporation, Brooklyn, New York. This machine was the first to spread long cut alimentary paste products onto a drying stick.
An industrial dryer for spaghetti or other long goods pasta products, also by the Consolidated Macaroni Machine Corporation
Dried spaghetti
Dried spaghetti measured with a "spaghetti measure". One portion of dried pasta weighs 116 g (4+1⁄8 oz), twice the amount of one serving on the package (12 mm circle or 60 g.). The measure can portion out 1, 2, 3, or 4 servings based on the diameter of the circle.
Fresh or dry spaghetti is cooked in a large pot of salted, boiling water and then drained in a colander (Italian: scolapasta).
In Italy, spaghetti is generally cooked al dente (Italian for "to the tooth"), fully cooked but still firm to the bite. It may also be cooked to a softer consistency.
Spaghettoni is a thicker spaghetti which takes more time to cook. Spaghettini is a thinner form which takes less time to cook. Capellini is a very thin form of spaghetti (it is also called "angel hair spaghetti" or "angel hair pasta") which cooks very quickly.
Utensils used in spaghetti preparation include the spaghetti scoop and spaghetti tongs.
Spaghetti being placed into a pot of boiling water for cooking
Draining the water from boiled spaghetti
A spaghetti scoop
Spaghetti tongs
An emblem of Italian cuisine, spaghetti is frequently served with tomato sauce, which may contain various herbs (especially oregano and basil), olive oil, meat, or vegetables. Other spaghetti preparations include amatriciana or carbonara. Grated hard cheeses, such as Pecorino Romano, Parmesan and Grana Padano, are often sprinkled on top.[citation needed]
In some countries, spaghetti is sold in cans/tins with sauce.[citation needed]
In the United States, it is sometimes served with Cincinnati chili. Unlike in Italy, in other countries spaghetti is often served with Bolognese sauce.[citation needed]
In the Philippines, a popular variant is the Filipino spaghetti, which is distinctively sweet with the tomato sauce sweetened with banana ketchup or sugar. It typically uses a large amount of giniling (ground meat), sliced hotdogs, and cheese. The dish dates back to the period between the 1940s to the 1960s. During the American Commonwealth Period, a shortage of tomato supplies in the Second World War forced the development of the banana ketchup.[15][16][17] Spaghetti was introduced by the Americans and was tweaked to suit the local Filipino predilection for sweet dishes.[18]
Sapaketti phat khi mao (Spaghetti fried drunken noodle style) is a popular dish in Thai cuisine.[19]
Spaghetti is a main part of laksa Johor, a specialty from Johor, Malaysia.[20]
Spaghetti aglio e olio
Spaghetti alla puttanesca
Spaghetti cacio e pepe (cheese and pepper) at a restaurant in Rome
Spaghetti con pollo e funghi
Spaghetti pomodoro & basilico (tomato sauce and basil)
Spaghetti alle vongole
Spaghetti with meatballs
By 1955, annual consumption of spaghetti in Italy doubled from 14 kilograms (31 lb) per person before World War II to 28 kilograms (62 pounds).[22] By that year, Italy produced 1,432,990 tons of spaghetti, of which 74,000 were exported, and had a production capacity of 3 million tons.[22]
Pasta provides carbohydrates, along with some protein, iron, dietary fiber, potassium and B vitamins.[24] Pasta prepared with whole wheat grain provides more dietary fiber[24] than that prepared with degermed flour.
The world record for the largest bowl of spaghetti was set in March 2009 and reset in March 2010 when a Buca di Beppo restaurant in Garden Grove, California, filled a swimming pool with more than 6,250 kg (13,780 lb) of pasta.[25]
The term Spaghetti Western was used by American critics and those in other countries because most of the Western movies made in Europe were produced and directed by Italians.[26]
The BBC television program Panorama featured a hoax program about the spaghetti harvest in Switzerland on April Fools' Day, 1957.[27]
The story "Confession publique faite par la dernière mangeuse de spaghettis", from the collection Le Génie de l'aubergine et autres contes loufoques, by Pierre Cormon (1997), features a woman who refuses to give up traditional spaghetti in favour of spaghetti cubes, the latest innovation from the agri-food industry in 2053, and pays a high price for it.
Spaghetti code means badly written code.




Information box
{'Type': 'Pasta', 'Place of origin': 'Italy', 'Main ingredients': 'Semolina or flour, water', 'Energy': '460 kJ (110 kcal)', 'Carbohydrates': '22g', 'Sugars': '0g', 'Dietary fiber': '1g', 'Fat': '0.5g', 'Saturated': '0g', 'Trans': '0g', 'Protein': '4g', 'Vitamins': 'Quantity\n%DV†', 'Vitamin A equiv.': '0%\n0 μg', 'Vitamin C': '0%\n0 mg', 'Minerals': 'Quantity\n%DV†', 'Calcium': '0%\n0 mg', 'Iron': '31%\n4 mg', 'Sodium': '0%\n0 mg'}