26668,
Sumba,
Sumba (Petjo: Soemba-eiland; Indonesian: pulau Sumba), natively also spelt as Humba or Hubba (in Sumba languages) is an Indonesian island (part of the Lesser Sunda Archipelago group) located in the Eastern Indonesia and administratively part of the East Nusa Tenggara provincial territory. Sumba has an area of 11,006.62 square kilometres (4,249.68 square miles), and the population was 779,049 at the 2020 Census;[3] the official estimate as of mid-2021 was 788,190.[4] To the northwest of Sumba is Sumbawa, to the northeast, across the Sumba Strait (Selat Sumba), is Flores, to the east, across the Savu Sea, is Timor, and to the south, across part of the Indian Ocean, is Australia.
The name of this island is etymologically derived from the native Sumba word of humba or hubba (in certain dialects), which literally means “no interfere”, “original”, “native”, or “indigenous”; which initially an ethnonym referring to the native inhabitant of this island who identified themselves as tau Humba or tau Hubba (lit. 'native people' or 'original people'), the identification was made to differentiate themselves from foreigners (non-Sumba people) who gradually and continuously came to occupy the island.
On the other hand, the Sumba's cultural territory (which including the Sumba Island and its surrounding sea region) are also natively known as tana wai humba or tana wae hubba (in Sumba languages) which literally means “our native land” or “the motherland of Sumba people”; these sentence appeared in ancient Sumba manuscripts that told the tale of Inya Nyale (a mermaid-like creature who used to live on land but then in ocean) who considered as sacred figure in Sumba mythology.
The letter of 'h' in later time (around 12th century) substituted as 's' due to the mass migration of Javanese people who came from the island of Java, because the word humba sounds so similar to the Javanese word of ꦲꦸꦩ꧀ꦧꦃ (umbah, but written as humbah according to Javanese writing system), which bear the meaning "to wash" or "to cleanse".
According to the native Sumba historians, the Sumba Island was once interconnected to its neighbouring islands in northern territory of Sumba, namely Flores and Sumbawa; and to reach the Flores Island itself specifically, was connected by the ancient stone bridge built by the native of Sumba–Flores which known locally as Kataka Lindiwatu (in Sumba languages).[5] Due to the high level of socialization around the Kataka Lindiwatu which connected both islands, the civilization was thought to arise from around those region (which nowadays corresponds to northern Sumba, part of East Sumba regencial territory); these information was examined through the Sumba oral tradition as what later written in 21st century by Umbu Pura Woha (2007) in his book Sejarah, Musyawarah dan Adat Istiadat Sumba Timur (lit. 'History, Deliberation and Customs of East Sumba').[5]
The proven historical civilization ruins of the Sumba people on the island dates back to BC era; for instance, the megalithic burials were found on the central regions of the island (Central Sumba) which anthropologically could be examined goes back to thousands of years ago. These stone-based burial traditions somehow are still kept alive by the Sumba people and has become a 'living ancient tradition' that still can be observed by scholars in modern-days.[6] The megalithic remains found on Sumba Island are including the dolmen tombs, upright stones, megalithic statues, stone enclosures, and leveled terraces.[7] The Sumba megalithic tradition itself characterized by the old megaliths that have been built and carved in high quality.[7] Some ancient tools are also found on the island, some notable findings are found at the Anakalang land (a cultural region of Anakalang Sumba, a subethnic group of Sumba people), which quadrangular adzes have been unearthed in the region.[8]
Around the 12th century, the kingdom of Singhasari in eastern Java gained more power over the maritime Southeast Asian territory after the kingdom defeated the Mongol; since then, these kingdom evolved as the empire known as Majapahit. The Sumba Island was a subject of Majapahit's dominion, and the word "Sumba" itself was first officially used during the Majapahit era (mentioned in the ancient Javanese manuscripts of Pararaton and Sumpah Palapa oath of Gajah Mada); the word itself was thought as the closest substitution in Javanese for the native name of the island according to native Sumba people, which is Humba or Hubba (in Sumba languages). The Javanese people was predicted to arrived on the Sumba Island via the Madura and Kangean route, it was examined through the analysis on the DNA of chicken species on Sumba that are naturally only endemic to the eastern regions of Java and its neighbouring islands (which in these case, most probably Kangean Island).[9]
In 1522, the native Sumba came into contact with the Europeans (Portuguese) who arrived on the island by ships to exploited the natural resources of the island. Later, it also attracted the Dutch VOC to come in the region in circa 1600s era. Historically, sandalwood was the main commodity exported to Europe from this island, thus the Sumba Island back then colloquially also known as the Sandalwood Island[10] or Sandel Island (in English).
As the time goes by, in 1866, the island of Sumba was later transferred to and dominated by the following Dutch East Indies colonization power. The well-known Christianization of the natives of Sumba Island was started in 1886 by the Dutch under the Douwe Wielenga Jesuits missionary program in the district of Laura in West Sumba.[11]
The largest town on the island is the main port of Waingapu, with a population of 35,932 in 2021.
The landscape is low, limestone hills, rather than the steep volcanoes of many Indonesian islands. There is a dry season from May to November and a rainy season from December to April. The western side of the island is more fertile and more heavily populated than the east.
Due to its distinctive flora and fauna Sumba has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as the Sumba deciduous forests ecoregion. Although generally thought to be originally part of the Gondwana southern hemisphere supercontinent, recent research suggests that it might have detached from the South East Asia margin. Sumba is in the Wallacea region, having a mixture of plants and animals of Asian and Australasian origin. Most of the island was originally covered in deciduous monsoon forest while the south-facing slopes, which remain moist during the dry season, were evergreen rainforest.[12]
There are a number of mammals, but the island is particularly rich in bird-life with nearly 200 birds, of which seven endemic species and a number of others are found only here and on some nearby islands. The endemic birds include the endangered Sumba eclectus parrot, four vulnerable species — the secretive Sumba boobook owl, Sumba buttonquail, red-naped fruit-dove, and Sumba hornbill — as well as three more common species: the Sumba green pigeon, Sumba flycatcher, and apricot-breasted sunbird.[12] Saltwater crocodiles can still be found in some areas.
The Sumba hornbill or Julang Sumba (Rhyticeros everetti) is under increasing threat of extinction. Indiscriminate deforestation is threatening their survival. The population is estimated at less than 4,000 with an average density of six individuals per square kilometre. A hornbill can fly to and from over an area of up to 100 square kilometres.[13]
Most of the original forest has been cleared for the planting of maize, cassava, and other crops so only small isolated patches remain. Furthermore, this clearance is ongoing due to the growing population of the island and this represents a threat to the birds.[14]
In 1998 two national parks were designated on the island for the protection of endangered species: the Laiwangi Wanggameti National Park and Manupeu Tanah Daru National Park.
Sumba is part of the East Nusa Tenggara province. The island and the very small offshore islands administered with it are split into four regencies (local government regions), following re-organisation on 2 January 2007 when two new regencies were created from parts of West Sumba Regency. The four regencies are Sumba Barat (West Sumba), Sumba Barat Daya (Southwest Sumba), Sumba Tengah (Central Sumba) and Sumba Timur (East Sumba). The island had 686,113 inhabitants at the 2010 Census,[15] which accounted for 14.6% of the provincial population in 2020. The figures for the regencies in 2010, 2020 and mid-2021 are given below. The provincial capital is not on Sumba Island, but in Kupang on West Timor.
Sumba has a highly stratified society based on castes.[16] This is especially true of East Sumba, whereas West Sumba is more ethnically and linguistically diverse.[17]
The Sumbanese people speak a variety of closely related Austronesian languages and have a mixture of Austronesian and Melanesian ancestry. The largest language group is the Kambera language, spoken by a quarter of a million people in the eastern half of Sumba.
Twenty-five to thirty percent of the population practices the animist Marapu religion. The remainder are Christian, a majority being Dutch Calvinist with a substantial minority being Roman Catholic. A small number of Sunni Muslims can be found along the coastal areas.
Sumba is famous for ikat textiles, particularly very detailed hand-woven ikat. The process of dyeing and weaving ikat is labor-intensive and one piece can take months to prepare.[18]
Sumba is one of the poorer islands of Indonesia.
A relatively high percentage of the population suffers from malaria, although the illness is almost eradicated in the west part of the island. Infant mortality is high.
Access to water is one of the major challenges in Sumba. During the dry season, many streams dry up and villagers depend on wells for scarce supplies of water.[19] Many villagers have to travel several kilometres several times a day to fetch water. It is mainly the women and children who are sent for water, while the men are at work. The Sumba Foundation has been active in raising sponsorship to drill wells in villages and attempting to reduce poverty on the island. As of February 2013, the Sumba Foundation were responsible for 48 wells and 191 water stations, a supplying 15 schools with water and sanitation, and reducing malaria rates by some 85%.[20]
Electricity mainly comes from diesel generators.[21] New projects include 3 MW Bayu wind power plant (PLTB) in Kadumbul, East Sumba by PT Hywind.  Another is the Bodo Hula Biomass Power Plant (PLTBm), West Sumba. 1 MW capacity. Other existing renewable electricity projects involve solar PV and micro-hydroelectricity.[22]
The island's most popular resort is the Nihi Sumba,[26] which has been ranked as one of the world's five best eco-hotels and was awarded the world's best hotel of 2016 and 2017 from Travel + Leisure for its native ambiance and authentic local experience.[27] Despite its expensive rates, the resort has been fully booked.[28]



Information box
{'Location': 'Indonesia', 'Coordinates': '9°40′S 120°00′E', 'Archipelago': 'Lesser Sunda Islands', 'Area': '11,005.62 km2 (4,249.29 sq mi)', 'Area rank': '73rd', 'Highest elevation': '1,225 m (4019 ft)', 'Highest point': 'Mount Wanggameti', 'Province': 'East Nusa Tenggara', 'Largest settlement': 'Waingapu (pop. 37,459[1])', 'Demonym': 'Sumbans; Sumbanese', 'Population': '788,190 (mid 2021 estimate[2])', 'Pop. density': '71.6/km2 (185.4/sq mi)', 'Languages': 'Predominantly native Sumba languages (Kambera, Momboru, Anakalang, Wanukaka, Wejewa, Lamboya, Kodi, Loli) and Indonesian (national language of Indonesia)', 'Ethnic groups': 'Predominantly Sumbans'}