2824,
TheABCSong,
"The ABC Song"[a] is the best-known song used to recite the English alphabet in alphabetical order. It is commonly used to teach the alphabet to children in English-speaking countries. "The ABC Song" was first copyrighted in 1835 by Boston music publisher Charles Bradlee. The melody is from a 1761 French music book and is also used in other nursery rhymes like "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star", while the lyricist is unknown. Songs set to the same melody are also used to teach the alphabets of other languages.
The melody of "The ABC Song" was first published in the French book of music Les Amusements d’une Heure et Demy (1761) without lyrics. It was adapted in Mozart's Twelve Variations and used in many nursery rhymes around the world, including "Ah! vous dirai-je, maman", "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star" and later "Baa, Baa, Black Sheep", before being used in this song.[1] The author of the lyrics is unknown.[2]
"The ABC Song" was first copyrighted in 1835 by Boston music publisher Charles Bradlee under the title "The A.B.C., a German air with variations for the flute with an easy accompaniment for the piano forte."[3][b] The melody was attributed to 18th-century composer Louis Le Maire.[4]
"The ABC Song" is commonly used in preschools across English-speaking countries. Due to the speed at which 'L, M, N, O, P' is spoken it is a common misconception among children still learning the alphabet to believe that it is in fact its own letter called "elemenopee". Some have proposed teaching slower versions of the song to avoid this issue, but attempts do so have been criticized for lacking the end rhymes and the 'L, M, N, O, P" part being an essential part of the song.[5][6] The television series Sesame Street has covered the song many times, collaborating with popular artists such as Stevie Wonder, Katy Perry, Nina Simone and Usher.[7]
Lyrics: (each line represents two measures, or eight beats)
In the dialects spoken in most English-speaking countries, including the United Kingdom, the letter name for Z is pronounced /zɛd/ (Zed); although in American English, the dialect in mind by the composer, the letter is more commonly pronounced /ziː/ (Zee). In dialects which use the Zed pronunciation, the absent Zee-rhyme is generally not missed, although whilst singing the song, some children may accommodate for Zee which they would otherwise not use on a regular basis. Variants of the song exist to accommodate the Zed pronunciation. One such variation is shown below:[9][10]
Several versions exist covering the alphabet backwards, i.e. Z to A. One version is shown below.
The e-d-c-b part is as fast as the l-m-n-o part in the normal alphabet song.
The same melody used for "The ABC Song" has also been used for the German, French, and Arabic alphabets.[12] A French-language version of the song is also taught in Canada, with generally no alterations to the melody except in the final line that requires adjustment to accommodate the two-syllable pronunciation of the French y.[citation needed]


