32774,
VictoriaUniversity,Toronto,
Victoria University is a federated university forming part of the wider University of Toronto, and was founded in 1836.
The undergraduate section of the university is Victoria College, informally Vic, after the original name of the university. Since 1928, Victoria College has retained secular studies in the liberal arts and sciences, nowadays through affiliation with the University of Toronto's Faculty of Arts and Science.
Emmanuel College functions as its postgraduate theological college, affiliated with the United Church of Canada and the Toronto School of Theology.
Victoria operated as an independent institution until its federation with the University of Toronto in 1890, relocating from Cobourg to Toronto.[3] Victoria is situated in the northeastern part of the wider university campus, adjacent to St. Michael's College and Queen's Park, and among its residential halls is Annesley Hall, a National Historic Site of Canada. A major centre for Reformation and Renaissance studies, the university is home to international scholarly projects and holdings devoted to pre-Puritan English drama and the works of Desiderius Erasmus.
Victoria College was founded as the Upper Canada Academy by the Wesleyan Methodist Church. In 1831, a church committee decided to locate the academy on four acres (1.6 hectares) of land in Cobourg, Ontario, east of Toronto, because of its central location in a large town and access by land and water. In 1836, Egerton Ryerson received a royal charter for the institution from King William IV in England, while the Upper Canadian government was hesitant to provide a charter to a Methodist institution. This was the first charter ever granted by the British Government to a Nonconformist body for an educational institution.[4] The school officially opened to male and female students on October 12, 1836, with Matthew Richey as principal.[5]  Although the school taught a variety of liberal arts subjects, it also functioned as an unofficial Methodist seminary. In 1841, it was incorporated as Victoria College, named in honour of Queen Victoria, and finally received a charter from the Upper Canadian Legislature.[6]
Victoria University formed in 1884 with the merger of Victoria College and Albert College in Belleville. In 1890, due to financial and geographic difficulties, Victoria University federated with the University of Toronto. In 1892, Victoria University moved from Cobourg to its current campus on Queen's Park Crescent, south of Bloor Street (at Charles Street West), in Toronto.
A plaque was erected at 100 University Avenue at the intersection with College Street in Cobourg, Ontario.
Victoria College
The cornerstone of this building was laid June 7, 1832, and teaching began in 1836. First operated under a royal charter by the Wesleyan Methodists as Upper Canada Academy, in 1841 it obtained a provincial charter under the name of Victoria College, giving it power to grant degrees. Victoria's first president was the Reverend Egerton Ryerson, newspaper editor and founder of Ontario's present educational system. In 1890 the college federated with the University of Toronto and, in 1892, left Cobourg.James Loudon, a former president of the federated universities, had prohibited dancing at the University of Toronto until 1896.  However, dancing at Victoria was not officially permissible until thirty years later, in 1926.
King George V gifted to Victoria College a silver cup used by Queen Victoria when she was a child and the Royal Standard that had flown at Osborne House and was draped on the coffin of the Queen when she died there in 1901.[7]
Two bronze plaques on either side of the South door of Victoria College were erected as memorials dedicated to the students of Victoria College who lost their lives in the First and Second World Wars. The WWI list of honour was erected by the Alumni and Alumnae Associations on October 13, 1923, while the WWII list of honour was erected by the Board of Regents.[8]
In 1928, the independent Union College federated with the theology department of Victoria College, and became Emmanuel College.
On the Old Ontario Strand for piano by Joyce Belyea was published for the Victoria College Music Club between 1946 and 1948 by the J.H. Peel Music Pub. Co. in Toronto.[9]
Victoria University borders Queen's Park, northeast of the University of Toronto's main campus alongside St. Michael's College. The Victoria College Building, colloquially called Old Vic, is an example of Richardsonian Romanesque architectural style, built in 1891. The architect was W. G. Storm, who died shortly after its completion. The campus is centred on the main quadrangle of Victoria, outlined by the Upper and Lower Houses of Burwash Hall.
West of the Lower Houses is the new Lester B. Pearson Garden of Peace and International Understanding and the E.J. Pratt Library beyond it. From the eastern side of the building, the Upper Houses look out at Rowell Jackman Hall and the Lower Houses see the St. Michael's College residence of Elmsley. The only exceptions are the view from Gate House's tower that looks down St. Mary's Street and the view from the south side of Bowles-Gandier house, which looks upon the main quadrangle of St. Michael's University College.
E.J. Pratt Library is the main library of Victoria University.[10] It was built in 1961 and is located at the south end of the quadrangle. The site of the library and the adjacent Northrop Frye Building was originally on the route of Queen's Park Crescent. The road was pushed south into Queen's Park to make way for the new buildings.[citation needed]
Victoria College is well-known for its historic residence buildings and tight-knit residence community.
Victoria University is governed bicamerally by the Victoria University Board of Regents and the Victoria University Senate. These bodies are represented by faculty, administrators, elected students and alumni. The colleges are governed by the Victoria College Council and Emmanuel College Council. College councils are represented by faculty, administrators and elected and appointed students. Victoria's governing charter was most recently amended in 1981, with the enactment of the Victoria University Act.[13]
Victoria is presently the wealthiest college at the University of Toronto by net assets. In part this has been because of alumni donations, but much of the growth is specifically due to the rapidly increasing value of Victoria's large real estate holdings in downtown Toronto. Today, the college has a securities portfolio worth approximately $78 million and a real estate portfolio worth $80 million.[14]
The E.J. Pratt Library is the main library in the Victoria University Library system, which operates under the wider University of Toronto Libraries system. The collection of approximately 250,000 volumes is geared towards the undergraduate programs at Vic and contains mainly humanities texts with a focus on History, English, Philosophy.[10] The library also hosts rich archival special collections from notable alumni and faculty, historical figures, specific literary collections and Canadiana.[15] The library also oversees Victoria University's institutional archives.[16] The Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies and its respective library collection is located within the E.J. Pratt Library. Its holdings fall into three main categories: rare books, most of which were printed before 1700 (currently about 4,000 titles), modern books and microforms (several thousand microfiches and reels). The library contains primary and secondary materials relating to virtually every aspect of the Renaissance and Reformation. In particular, it houses the Erasmus collection, one of the richest resources in North America for the study of works written or edited by the great Dutch humanist Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam. The collection holds a substantial number of pre-1700 editions of his works, including the Novum Instrumentum of 1516.
The academic programs of the college include Literary Studies, Semiotics and Communication Theory, Renaissance Studies, the Vic Concurrent Teacher Education Program (developed in conjunction with OISE/UT) and the first-year undergraduate programs Vic One and Vic First Pathways.[17]
The Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies (CRRS) is a research and teaching centre in Victoria University devoted to the study of the period from approximately 1350 to 1700. The CRRS supervises an undergraduate program in Renaissance Studies, organizes lectures and seminars, and maintains an active series of publications. The centre also offers undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral fellowships. From 1976 to 2009, the performance history research and publishing project Records of Early English Drama (REED) was based at Victoria University.
Campus life for Victoria students is active and varied. Victoria College has levy receivers, student organizations that directly receive a fixed amount of funding from students every year, as well as clubs whose funding are overseen by the Victoria University Students' Administrative Council (VUSAC).  Prominent clubs include The Boundary (the college's satire paper),[18] the Environmental Fashion Show, Vic Dance and the Victoria College Chorus.[19]
Levy receivers are students groups with special status based on providing an essential service for student life, and levy heads are also assessor members in VUSAC.  Victoria's eleven levy receivers are:[20]
Victoria is also home to the Isabel Bader Theatre, opened in March 2001. During the past few years the theatre has been used as a lecture hall for University of Toronto students, an active learning space for Victoria University students groups, numerous concerts, film screenings, conferences, and theatrical productions, including the annual sophomore tradition launched in 1872, The Bob Comedy Revue, each written, directed, produced and performed by students such as Lester B. Pearson, Norman Jewison, E. J. Pratt, Northrop Frye, and Margaret Atwood.[21]
Launched in 2003, the Vic One program is an academic opportunity for first-year students at the University of Toronto to build communication and leadership skills in a small classroom setting.[22] Applications typically open in December for any student who is applying to the University for enrolment in the following September.[23] The Vic One program supplements a student's primary program of study in the form of weekly small group seminars and guest lectures from professors, visiting artists, writers, ambassadors and other public figures.[24] Enrolment in each academic stream is limited to 25 students, with a maximum of 250 students in the program each year.[23] The eight streams are:
The Board of Regents is the governing body of Victoria University. The Board appoints the Chancellor, the President, the College Principals, the officers of the University, and appoints and promotes the teaching staff of Victoria and Emmanuel Colleges.[25]
The 37 members of the Board of Regents include students (6), faculty (8), Victoria College alumni (1), Emmanuel College alumni (2), United Church appointees (13), ex-officio (4) and discretionary (3).[25]
(1836 - 1841)
(1841 - 1884)
(1884 - )
Margaret Atwood
Donald Sutherland
Lester B. Pearson
Northrop Frye
E. J. Pratt
Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga
43°40′1″N 79°23′31″W﻿ / ﻿43.66694°N 79.39194°W﻿ / 43.66694; -79.39194



Information box
{'Former names': 'Upper Canada Academy (1836–1841)\nVictoria College (1841–1884)', 'Motto': 'Abeunt studia in mores', 'Motto in English': 'Studies pass into character', 'Type': 'Public federated university', 'Established': 'October 12, 1836; 186 years ago', 'Affiliation': 'University of Toronto', 'Religious affiliation': 'United Church of Canada\nformerly Methodist (1836–1925)', 'Endowment': 'C$523.9 million (2021)[1]', 'Chancellor': 'Nick Saul', 'President': 'Rhonda N. McEwen', 'Principal': 'Angela Esterhammer (Victoria College), HyeRan Kim-Cragg (Emmanuel College)', 'Undergraduates': '3,475 (2021)[2]', 'Location': 'Toronto, Ontario, Canada', 'Colors': '   Scarlet and gold', 'Mascot': 'Lion', 'Website': 'www.vicu.utoronto.ca'}