33635,
WikiProjectU.S.statesGeneral,
I have decided to create a WikiProject for U.S. States, to show what one might look like (I am hoping I have understood User:Manning Bartlett's proposal.) I have provided below my suggestions on how U.S. States are to be organized; but if anyone feels something below should be changed, feel free to do so. -- User:Simon J Kissane
Simon - this is excellent! MB
Thanks. I already wrote most of it a few days ago, when I discovered an article on Delaware that said little more than "a state made famous by Wayne's World". I decided then that maybe we needed some guidelines on exactly what should be in the articles :) -- User:Simon J Kissane
Simon--Very exciting... I have been trying for a while to get Michigan into shape, then I stumbled on this (should have looked more thoroughly at the outset... anyway), so I am very happy that you are taking charge. I hope I can help. My first question: what should the convention be for creating city entries within the state entries? Should it be:
Parma, Michigan with a specific entry for that specific town, delineated by Name and then State
or
Parma And have a super entry that branches off into all of the towns of that name the world over?
The same question holds true for counties. Should it be:
Jackson County, Michigan-- the specific county and state identifier
Jackson County-- the specific county, but then what do we do if there are multiple states with the same county
or
Jackson-- with links off to all entries: Jackson County, Jackson Five, etc.
Or is there some standardized combo that we might try?
--User:Trimalchio
Also, I think you will see when you click through on the above city and county links that lead to entries, that we need a standard for City and County Entries as well as for State entries. (this problem continues to inflate)--User:Trimalchio
Good point. So what would be the levels? Nation, State, County, Municipality (City, Village, Town etc)...--T
---
I am not too sure if that would work. Firstly, there are a few bits of information (e.g. date of admission to Union) which are specific to U.S. states, and the need for them needs to be noted somewhere.
More importantly, countries vary widely in how they are organized -- the U.S. and Australia has states, Canada has provinces, France has Departments, the UK has countries. And the levels of organization below that vary as well. For example, in the U.S. the main substate organization seems to be counties and cities, though Louisiana I think has parishes.
The place I know most about is NSW, Australia, and just going into some detail here will show how complicated things can be, and how much they can differ across the world. In NSW, we have for surveying purposes all sorts of divisions (NSW has Division, County, City/Shire, Parish, Locality), but administratively the main division is the city or shire. Cities are general urban or suburban, and shires are generally rural, but there are also shires (such as the one I live in, Baulkham Hills Shire) which are now largely suburban, but retain the name shire due to their rural past. NSW used to have administrative counties, which administered electrical power, water and sewerage for an area composed of several cities or shires, but they have been replaced by state-run corporatised utilities (e.g. Prospect County Council became Integral Energy). When they did this, they also changed the names and boundaries of the counties, but they no longer have any importance since now they are just a surveying division. Also note that shires in England are counties, but shires in Australia are subdivisions of counties. We also have an geographical entity unique to NSW, the Division. The most heavily populated Eastern part of the state is the Eastern Division, whilst most of the state forms the Western Division. Now both Divisions exist for surveying purposes, but only the Western Division has any administrative structure -- it is headed by the Western Lands Commissioner, whose main functions are to administer leases of government-owned land for agricultural or pastoral purposes, and to act as a local government in those areas too remote or unpopulated to govern themselves.
So I think it is going to be very hard to establish general rules, even if only because the terminology and structure is different. Maybe a better idea is to establish some sort of template, e.g. "WikiProject Geographical Area", on which we can base the WikiProjects for the myriad types of individual geographical entities that exist around the world -- User:Simon J Kissane.
Interesting. Well, setting aside Lousiana and its Catholic/French past, the majority of the United States were surveyed and organized on a pretty stable principle:
State, County, Township, Municipality.  What I think we should do is expand the US States Project to include guidelines for those four types of entries, then abstract that out to a general Geography Project. Hmmm... now, just to think this out before striking.... thanks, guys. --T
This looks excellent. May I suggest also adding each state's motto, song, tree, and bird? Also (perhaps) when the new state-designed quarter comes out (or came out)? Currently about 14 of them are out, maybe more (you can see there's not a lot of money going through my hands) :-D Also, why not different things the states are known for (this will probably come about on its own, but why not make adding it a deliberate effort: Georgia peaches, Idaho potatoes, Florida oranges, etc.  But not just limiting it to produce, that's just all I can think of right now.  Time to schlep off for a snack.... 16 hours straight at work... must have food....) --KQ
Sorry to be so dense:  Is this format just an outline for a final, prose-style article, or is it a precise format we should follow (complete with all the bullet points, etc)?  Should we literally copy and paste, then plug in the relevant details (ala Iowa)?  I tried to give some organization to Vermont a while back, but it lacks indentation or bullet points.  Is this incorrect?  ... Also, it would be nice if we could move (potentially) long enumerated lists like "cities" to a separate statistics/facts section at the end of the article.  -D
Well, I think ideally this format should lead to good, full prose articles (California looks good, though I haven't read it  closely yet), except where prose just doesn't work. That is, the way I am doing it on Michigan is I am starting with this skeleton and then fleshing it out into prose as I go along. But, as you can see, I am early on and it looks pretty skeletal. But that helps me at least so that i remember what needs to be added, and it also should help others to know what needs adding (anyway, I hope that it doesn't just scare them away). So I would say if you are starting on a state, copy over the whole skeleton and fit what data that is there into it. Then, as you go, flesh the bullet points into full pieces of prose. As you go you can decide if you want to keep the actual bullet points or not. I think the main thing is to be sure that as much of that data is covered as can be covered. (Long day teaching, so my prose might be coming out a little punch drunk... sorry).
As to the cities issue, again, what i did (and that is really just my opinion, not anything more than that) was to make a subpage with the list of all the cities of that state. It's just a list page, so it qualifies in my mind as being a good subpage because it isn't really its own entry. Unlike a lot of things, lists of cities that belong to a state really constitute a subordinate piece of data. I figure that any data list associated to a state (Cities, Counties, Attractions) is a pretty good candidate for a subpage like talk. The state is its own entry, and the individual cities or counties or whatever get their own page, but the bridgepage with the list can be a subpage.
Anyway, punchdrunk. Students are insane. very tired.---User:Trimalchio
Okay, well my suggestion is that we add standards for U.S. Counties and Cities (either as part of this WikiProject, or as a separate WikiProject). And a WikiProject Countries of the World would be good as well. But I'm still somewhat doubtful about creating general guidelines for the subdivisions of all countries, just because practice around the world is so different. -- User:Simon J Kissane
It is my intention to start moving all those countries of the world articles off subpages as soon as I get more than 10 spare minutes in a row.  :-)  There's talk of that at talk:countries of the world; any suggestions about it?  --KQ
It'd be nice if we could put a little bit more meat into the Introduction.  There are some very relevant facts that distinguish each state, and it would be nice to note them right at the front.  Few people are going to dig deep into the Politics/Government section to learn that New Hampshire is nationally known for its State Primary, for instance. --D
I noticed on one recent article about a city, the following appeared:
I don't much like this, maybe just because of the wording, but probably because of something deeper.  Let me explain.  To me, it sounds as though we are trying to give polite help on how we expect contributors to edit City Entries.  (Capitalized, as if we had all decided what City Entries are and exactly what they should include.)  Polite contributors will respect this and then, finding themselves under a social or moral obligation to review and follow a complex set of rules & regs, will give up.
This is precisely what we don't want to happen, but I suspect it already has happened.  The reason that Wikipedia has been so successful so far is that people with useful information to impart have felt completely free to add it to Wikipedia in whatever fashion they felt comfortable with.  I think one disorganized but basically correct paragraph about someone's hometown is a heck of a lot better than nothing, for our purposes.
I do think Manning, Simon, and everyone else at work on these various WikiProjects has had only the best interests of Wikipedia at heart, and I totally agree that neatly formatted and uniform entries are better than messy and inconsistent entries (everything else being equal).  But I tend to think that formatting and making-consistent is something we should put off for quite a while, and when we do start thinking seriously about it, it ought to be with the input of actual professional geographers, historians, lit professors, and others with the relevant background.
What do you think?
--User:Larry Sanger
I didn't realize that you had answered interstitially.... your above expansion of the wikiproject link idea is a good one and I will try to implement it. -T
An exception to this rule is Georgia, since that is the name of both a U.S. State and an independent country in the Caucasus
How about Washington?
Wouldn't it be cool if the measurements i.e inches, feets and fairenheighs could use the SI system too? centimeters, Celsius degrees, kilimeters and so on..
I added "Largest city" since its a useful statistic, and that I already added it to all of the state pages. WhisperToMe 04:45, 5 Oct 2003 (UTC)


